1. J Neurophysiol. 2020 Mar 1;123(3):1180-1192. doi: 10.1152/jn.00524.2019. Epub 
2020 Feb 26.

Savings in sensorimotor adaptation without an explicit strategy.

Yin C(1), Wei K(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Capital University of Physical Education and Sports, Beijing, China.
(2)School of Psychological and Cognitive Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, 
China.
(3)Beijing Key Laboratory of Behavior and Mental Health, Beijing, China.
(4)Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Beijing, China.

The hallmark of long-term retention of sensorimotor adaptation is a faster 
relearning when similar perturbations are encountered again. However, what 
processes underlie this saving effect is in debate. Though motor adaptation is 
traditionally viewed as a type of procedural learning, its savings has been 
recently shown to be solely based on a quick recall of explicit adaptation 
strategy. Here, we showed that adaptation to a novel error-invariant 
perturbation without an explicit strategy could enable subsequent savings. We 
further showed that adaptation to gradual perturbations could enable savings, 
which was supported by enhanced implicit learning. Our study provides supporting 
evidence that long-term retention of motor adaptation is possible without 
forming or recalling a cognitive strategy, and the interplay between implicit 
and explicit learning critically depends on the specifics of learning protocol 
and available sensory feedback.NEW & NOTEWORTHY Savings in motor learning 
sometimes refers to faster learning when one encounters the same perturbation 
again. Previous studies assert that forming a cognitive strategy for countering 
perturbations is necessary for savings. We used novel experimental techniques to 
prevent the formation of a cognitive strategy during initial adaptation and 
found that savings still existed during relearning. Our findings suggest that 
savings in sensorimotor adaptation do not exclusively depend on forming and 
recalling an explicit strategy.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00524.2019
PMID: 32101495


2. Behav Brain Res. 2021 Feb 1;398:112979. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2020.112979. Epub 
2020 Oct 24.

The effect of sequence learning on sensorimotor adaptation.

Liu Y(1), Block HJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Indiana University Bloomington, Dept. of Kinesiology & Program in 
Neuroscience, United States.
(2)Indiana University Bloomington, Dept. of Kinesiology & Program in 
Neuroscience, United States. Electronic address: hjblock@indiana.edu.

Motor skill learning involves both sensorimotor adaptation (calibrating the 
response to task dynamics and kinematics), and sequence learning (executing task 
elements in the correct order at the necessary speed). These processes typically 
occur together in natural behavior and share much in common, such as working 
memory demands, development, and possibly neural substrates. However, 
sensorimotor and sequence learning are usually studied in isolation in research 
settings, for example as force field adaptation or serial reaction time tasks 
(SRTT), respectively. It is therefore unclear whether having predictive sequence 
information during sensorimotor adaptation would facilitate performance, perhaps 
by improving sensorimotor planning, or if it would impair performance, perhaps 
by occupying neural resources needed for sensorimotor adaptation. Here we 
evaluated adaptation to a position-dependent force field in two different SRTT 
contexts: In Experiment 1, 28 subjects reached between 4 targets in a sequenced 
or random order. In Experiment 2, 40 subjects reached to one target, but 3 force 
field directions were applied in a sequenced or random order. No consistent 
influence of target position sequence on force field adaptation was observed in 
Experiment 1. However, sequencing of force field directions facilitated 
sensorimotor adaptation and retention in Experiment 2. This is inconsistent with 
the idea that sensorimotor and sequence learning share neural resources in any 
mutually exclusive fashion. These findings indicate that under certain 
conditions, sequence learning interacts with sensorimotor adaptation in a 
facilitatory manner. Future research will be needed to determine what 
circumstances and features of sequence learning are facilitatory to sensorimotor 
adaptation.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2020.112979
PMID: 33164864


3. J Acoust Soc Am. 2020 Dec;148(6):3682. doi: 10.1121/10.0002876.

Sensorimotor adaptation of speech depends on the direction of auditory feedback 
alteration.

Kothare H(1), Raharjo I(1), Ramanarayanan V(2), Ranasinghe K(3), Parrell B(4), 
Johnson K(5), Houde JF(6), Nagarajan SS(7).

Author information:
(1)UC Berkeley - UCSF Graduate Program in Bioengineering, University of 
California San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.
(2)Educational Testing Service R&D, San Francisco, California 94105, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California 94143, USA.
(4)Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 53715, USA.
(5)Department of Linguistics, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, 
California 94720, USA.
(6)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of California, 
San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.
(7)Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.

A hallmark feature of speech motor control is its ability to learn to anticipate 
and compensate for persistent feedback alterations, a process referred to as 
sensorimotor adaptation. Because this process involves adjusting articulation to 
counter the perceived effects of altering acoustic feedback, there are a number 
of factors that affect it, including the complex relationship between acoustics 
and articulation and non-uniformities of speech perception. As a consequence, 
sensorimotor adaptation is hypothesised to vary as a function of the direction 
of the applied auditory feedback alteration in vowel formant space. This 
hypothesis was tested in two experiments where auditory feedback was altered in 
real time, shifting the frequency values of the first and second formants (F1 
and F2) of participants' speech. Shifts were designed on a subject-by-subject 
basis and sensorimotor adaptation was quantified with respect to the direction 
of applied shift, normalised for individual speakers. Adaptation was indeed 
found to depend on the direction of the applied shift in vowel formant space, 
independent of shift magnitude. These findings have implications for models of 
sensorimotor adaptation of speech.

DOI: 10.1121/10.0002876
PMCID: PMC7738200
PMID: 33379892


4. Front Neurosci. 2020 Mar 6;14:174. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2020.00174. eCollection 
2020.

Motorized Shoes Induce Robust Sensorimotor Adaptation in Walking.

Aucie Y(1), Zhang X(2), Sargent R(3), Torres-Oviedo G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioengineering, Swanson School of Engineering, University of 
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States.
(2)Nimbus Robotics, Pittsburgh, PA, United States.
(3)The Robotics Institute, School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon 
University, Pittsburgh, PA, United States.

The motor system has the flexibility to update motor plans according to 
systematic changes in the environment or the body. This capacity is studied in 
the laboratory through sensorimotor adaptation paradigms imposing sustained and 
predictable motor demands specific to the task at hand. However, these studies 
are tied to the laboratory setting. Thus, we asked if a portable device could be 
used to elicit locomotor adaptation outside the laboratory. To this end, we 
tested the extent to which a pair of motorized shoes could induce similar 
locomotor adaptation to split-belt walking, which is a well-established 
sensorimotor adaptation paradigm in locomotion. We specifically compared the 
adaptation effects (i.e. after-effects) between two groups of young, healthy 
participants walking with the legs moving at different speeds by either a 
split-belt treadmill or a pair of motorized shoes. The speeds at which the legs 
moved in the split-belt group was set by the belt speed under each foot, whereas 
in the motorized shoes group were set by the combined effect of the actuated 
shoes and the belts' moving at the same speed. We found that the adaptation of 
joint motions and measures of spatial and temporal asymmetry, which are commonly 
used to quantify sensorimotor adaptation in locomotion, were indistinguishable 
between groups. We only found small differences in the joint angle kinematics 
during baseline walking between the groups - potentially due to the weight and 
height of the motorized shoes. Our results indicate that robust sensorimotor 
adaptation in walking can be induced with a paired of motorized shoes, opening 
the exciting possibility to study sensorimotor adaptation during more realistic 
situations outside the laboratory.

Copyright © 2020 Aucie, Zhang, Sargent and Torres-Oviedo.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2020.00174
PMCID: PMC7069354
PMID: 32210750


5. Neuroscience. 2017 Jul 25;356:217-228. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2017.05.029. 
Epub 2017 May 23.

Sensorimotor adaptation of whole-body postural control.

Shiller DM(1), Veilleux LN(2), Marois M(3), Ballaz L(4), Lemay M(4).

Author information:
(1)École d'orthophonie et d'audiologie, Université de Montréal, C.P. 6128, 
succursale Centre-ville, Montréal, Québec H3C 3J7, Canada; Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire Sainte-Justine Research Centre, 3175 Chemin de la 
Côte-Sainte-Catherine, Montreal, Quebec H3T 1C4, Canada; Centre de Réadaptation 
Marie Enfant, 5200 Rue Bélanger, Montréal, Quebec H1T 1C9, Canada. Electronic 
address: douglas.shiller@umontreal.ca.
(2)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Sainte-Justine Research Centre, 3175 Chemin 
de la Côte-Sainte-Catherine, Montreal, Quebec H3T 1C4, Canada; Centre de 
Réadaptation Marie Enfant, 5200 Rue Bélanger, Montréal, Quebec H1T 1C9, Canada; 
Département de kinésiologie, Université de Montréal, 2100 boulevard 
Édouard-Montpetit, Bureau 8202, Montreal, Quebec H3T 1J4, Canada; Hôpital 
Shriners pour Enfant-Canada, 1003 Boulevard Décarie, Montréal, Quebec H4A 0A9, 
Canada.
(3)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Sainte-Justine Research Centre, 3175 Chemin 
de la Côte-Sainte-Catherine, Montreal, Quebec H3T 1C4, Canada; Centre de 
Réadaptation Marie Enfant, 5200 Rue Bélanger, Montréal, Quebec H1T 1C9, Canada; 
Département de Génie Physique, Polytechnique Montréal, 2900 boul. 
Édouard-Montpetit, Montréal, Quebec H3T 1J4, Canada.
(4)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Sainte-Justine Research Centre, 3175 Chemin 
de la Côte-Sainte-Catherine, Montreal, Quebec H3T 1C4, Canada; Centre de 
Réadaptation Marie Enfant, 5200 Rue Bélanger, Montréal, Quebec H1T 1C9, Canada; 
Département des sciences de l'activité physique, Université du Québec à 
Montréal, C.P. 8888, succursale Centre-Ville, Montreal, Quebec H3C 3P8, Canada.

The aim of the present study was to examine the modification of postural 
symmetry during quiet standing using a sensorimotor adaptation paradigm. A group 
of neurologically typical adult participants performed a visually guided 
mediolateral (left-right) weight shifting task requiring precise adjustments in 
body orientation. During one phase of the task, the visual feedback of center of 
pressure (COP) was systematically biased toward the left or the right, requiring 
an adjustment in posture to compensate. COP during quiet standing without visual 
feedback was examined prior to and immediately following the sensorimotor 
adaptation procedure, in order to observe whether compensatory adjustments in 
postural control resulting from the visual-feedback manipulation would transfer 
to the control of whole-body COP during quiet standing. Results showed that the 
sensorimotor adaptation procedure induced a small but reliable compensatory 
change in the stance of participants, resulting in a change in postural symmetry 
and control that was found to persist even after normal visual feedback was 
restored.

Copyright © 2017 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2017.05.029
PMID: 28549560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Neurosci. 2020 Apr 8;40(15):3075-3088. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1506-19.2020. 
Epub 2020 Feb 6.

Task Errors Drive Memories That Improve Sensorimotor Adaptation.

Leow LA(1), Marinovic W(2), de Rugy A(3), Carroll TJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Sensorimotor Performance, School of Human Movement and Nutrition 
Sciences, University of Queensland, Brisbane, 4072 Queensland, Australia, 
l.leow@uq.edu.au.
(2)School of Psychology, Curtin University, Bentley, 6102 Western Australia, 
Australia, and.
(3)Institut de Neurosciences Cognitives et Intégratives d'Aquitaine, Centre 
National de la Recherche Scientifique Unité Mixte de Recherche 5287, Université 
de Bordeaux, France 33076.
(4)Centre for Sensorimotor Performance, School of Human Movement and Nutrition 
Sciences, University of Queensland, Brisbane, 4072 Queensland, Australia.

Traditional views of sensorimotor adaptation (i.e., adaptation of movements to 
perturbed sensory feedback) emphasize the role of automatic, implicit correction 
of sensory prediction errors. However, latent memories formed during 
sensorimotor adaptation, manifest as improved relearning (e.g., savings), have 
recently been attributed to strategic corrections of task errors (failures to 
achieve task goals). To dissociate contributions of task errors and sensory 
prediction errors to latent sensorimotor memories, we perturbed target locations 
to remove or enforce task errors during learning and/or test, with male/female 
human participants. Adaptation improved after learning in all conditions where 
participants were permitted to correct task errors, and did not improve whenever 
we prevented correction of task errors. Thus, previous correction of task errors 
was both necessary and sufficient to improve adaptation. In contrast, a history 
of sensory prediction errors was neither sufficient nor obligatory for improved 
adaptation. Limiting movement preparation time showed that the latent memories 
driven by learning to correct task errors take at least two forms: a 
time-consuming but flexible component, and a rapidly expressible, inflexible 
component. The results provide strong support for the idea that movement 
corrections driven by a failure to successfully achieve movement goals underpin 
motor memories that manifest as savings. Such persistent memories are not 
exclusively mediated by time-consuming strategic processes but also comprise a 
rapidly expressible but inflexible component. The distinct characteristics of 
these putative processes suggest dissociable underlying mechanisms, and imply 
that identification of the neural basis for adaptation and savings will require 
methods that allow such dissociations.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT Latent motor 
memories formed during sensorimotor adaptation manifest as improved adaptation 
when sensorimotor perturbations are reencountered. Conflicting theories suggest 
that this "savings" is underpinned by different mechanisms, including a memory 
of successful actions, a memory of errors, or an aiming strategy to correct task 
errors. Here we show that learning to correct task errors is sufficient to show 
improved subsequent adaptation with respect to naive performance, even when 
tested in the absence of task errors. In contrast, a history of sensory 
prediction errors is neither sufficient nor obligatory for improved adaptation. 
Finally, we show that latent sensorimotor memories driven by task errors 
comprise at least two distinct components: a time-consuming, flexible component, 
and a rapidly expressible, inflexible component.

Copyright © 2020 the authors.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1506-19.2020
PMCID: PMC7141883
PMID: 32029533 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Neurophysiol. 2021 Feb 1;125(2):426-436. doi: 10.1152/jn.00306.2020. Epub 2020 
Dec 9.

The effects of a spaceflight analog with elevated CO(2) on sensorimotor 
adaptation.

Banker LA(1), Salazar AP(1), Lee JK(2), Beltran NE(3), Kofman IS(3), De Dios 
YE(3), Mulder E(2), Bloomberg JJ(4), Mulavara AP(3), Seidler RD(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Physiology and Kinesiology, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, Florida.
(2)Institute of Aerospace Medicine, German Aerospace Center, Cologne, Germany.
(3)KBR, Houston, Texas.
(4)NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas.
(5)Department of Neurology, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida.

Aboard the International Space Station (ISS), astronauts must adapt to altered 
vestibular and somatosensory inputs due to microgravity. Sensorimotor adaptation 
on Earth is often studied with a task that introduces visuomotor conflict. 
Retention of the adaptation process, known as savings, can be measured when 
subjects are exposed to the same adaptive task multiple times. It is unclear how 
adaptation demands found on the ISS might interfere with the ability to adapt to 
other sensory conflict at the same time. In the present study, we investigated 
the impact of 30 days' head-down tilt bed rest combined with elevated carbon 
dioxide (HDBR + CO2) as a spaceflight analog on sensorimotor adaptation. Eleven 
subjects used a joystick to move a cursor to targets presented on a computer 
screen under veridical cursor feedback and 45° rotated feedback. During this 
NASA campaign, five individuals presented with optic disk edema, a sign of 
spaceflight-associated neuro-ocular syndrome (SANS). Thus, we also performed 
post hoc exploratory analyses between subgroups who did and did not show signs 
of SANS. HDBR + CO2 had some impact on sensorimotor adaptation, with a lack of 
savings across the whole group. SANS individuals showed larger, more persistent 
after-effects, suggesting a shift from relying on cognitive to more implicit 
processing of adaptive behaviors. Overall, these findings suggest that HDBR + 
CO2 alters the way in which individuals engage in sensorimotor processing. These 
findings have important implications for missions and mission training, which 
require individuals to adapt to altered sensory inputs over long periods in 
space.NEW & NOTEWORTHY This is the first bed rest campaign examining 
sensorimotor adaptation and savings in response to the combined effect of HDBR + 
CO2 and to observe signs of spaceflight-associated neuro-ocular syndrome (SANS) 
in HDBR participants. Our findings suggest that HDBR + CO2 alters the way that 
individuals engage in sensorimotor processing. Individuals who developed signs 
of SANS seem to rely more on implicit rather than cognitive processing of 
adaptive behaviors than subjects who did not present signs of SANS.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00306.2020
PMID: 33296611


8. J Neurophysiol. 2020 Apr 1;123(4):1342-1354. doi: 10.1152/jn.00687.2019. Epub 
2020 Mar 4.

Challenging balance during sensorimotor adaptation increases generalization.

Bakkum A(1), Donelan JM(1), Marigold DS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Physiology and Kinesiology, Simon Fraser University, 
Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada.

From reaching to walking, real-life experience suggests that people can 
generalize between motor behaviors. One possible explanation for this 
generalization is that real-life behaviors often challenge our balance. We 
propose that the exacerbated body motions associated with balance-challenged 
whole body movements increase the value to the nervous system of using a 
comprehensive internal model to control the task. Because it is less customized 
to a specific task, a more comprehensive model is also a more generalizable 
model. Here we tested the hypothesis that challenging balance during adaptation 
would increase generalization of a newly learned internal model. We encouraged 
participants to learn a new internal model using prism lenses that created a new 
visuomotor mapping. Four groups of participants adapted to prisms while 
performing either a standing-based reaching or precision walking task, with or 
without a manipulation that challenged balance. To assess generalization after 
the adaptation phase, participants performed a single trial of each of the other 
groups' tasks without prisms. We found that both the reaching and walking 
balance-challenged groups showed significantly greater generalization to the 
equivalent, nonadapted task than the balance-unchallenged groups. Additionally, 
we found some evidence that all groups generalized across tasks, for example, 
from walking to reaching and vice versa, regardless of balance manipulation. 
Overall, our results demonstrate that challenging balance increases the degree 
to which a newly learned internal model generalizes to untrained movements.NEW & 
NOTEWORTHY Real-life experience indicates that people can generalize between 
motor behaviors. Here we show that challenging balance during the learning of a 
new internal model increases the degree of generalization to untrained movements 
for both reaching and walking tasks. These results suggest that the effects of 
challenging balance are not specific to the task but instead apply to motor 
learning more broadly.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00687.2019
PMCID: PMC7191513
PMID: 32130079

Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts of interest, financial or 
otherwise, are declared by the authors.


9. J Acoust Soc Am. 2017 Apr;141(4):2693. doi: 10.1121/1.4979791.

Sensorimotor adaptation affects perceptual compensation for coarticulation.

Schuerman WL(1), Nagarajan S(2), McQueen JM(3), Houde J(4).

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Radiology, University of California-San Francisco School of 
Medicine, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.
(3)Radboud University, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, University of 
California-San Francisco School of Medicine, San Francisco, California 94143, 
USA.

A given speech sound will be realized differently depending on the context in 
which it is produced. Listeners have been found to compensate perceptually for 
these coarticulatory effects, yet it is unclear to what extent this effect 
depends on actual production experience. In this study, whether changes in 
motor-to-sound mappings induced by adaptation to altered auditory feedback can 
affect perceptual compensation for coarticulation is investigated. Specifically, 
whether altering how the vowel [i] is produced can affect the categorization of 
a stimulus continuum between an alveolar and a palatal fricative whose 
interpretation is dependent on vocalic context is tested. It was found that 
participants could be sorted into three groups based on whether they tended to 
oppose the direction of the shifted auditory feedback, to follow it, or a 
mixture of the two, and that these articulatory responses, not the shifted 
feedback the participants heard, correlated with changes in perception. These 
results indicate that sensorimotor adaptation to altered feedback can affect the 
perception of unaltered yet coarticulatorily-dependent speech sounds, suggesting 
a modulatory role of sensorimotor experience on speech perception.

DOI: 10.1121/1.4979791
PMCID: PMC5848838
PMID: 28464681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Exp Brain Res. 2018 Jul;236(7):1881-1895. doi: 10.1007/s00221-018-5272-9. Epub 
2018 Apr 25.

Neural bases of sensorimotor adaptation in the vocal motor system.

Behroozmand R(1), Sangtian S(2).

Author information:
(1)Speech Neuroscience Lab, Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, 
University of South Carolina, 915 Greene Street, Columbia, SC, 29208, USA. 
r-behroozmand@sc.edu.
(2)Speech Neuroscience Lab, Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, 
University of South Carolina, 915 Greene Street, Columbia, SC, 29208, USA.

The present study used event-related potential (ERP) recordings to investigate 
the neural mechanisms of sensorimotor adaptation in response to altered auditory 
feedback (AAF) during vocal production. 12 healthy speakers were tested under a 
vocal motor adaptation paradigm in which the fundamental frequency (F0) of their 
voice auditory feedback was pitch-shifted downward by one semi-tone (- 100 
cents) during vowel vocalizations. Behavioral results revealed that subjects 
adapted to AAF by producing opposing (upward) responses to pitch-shift stimuli, 
and this adaptive behavior persisted after feedback alteration was removed 
(washout). We found that adaptation to AAF was accompanied by a significant 
increase in the amplitude of a parietal ERP activity elicited after the onset of 
vocalization. However, no such effect was observed for pre-motor ERPs elicited 
before vocalization onset. Moreover, we found that adaptive vocal responses were 
negatively correlated with ERPs over the parietal and positively correlated with 
those over the fronto-central areas after vocalization onset. These findings 
suggest that vocal motor adaptation is mediated by sensorimotor reprogramming of 
feedforward motor commands through incorporating auditory feedback, which is 
indexed by modulation of behavioral and ERP responses to AAF. We suggest that 
modulation of neural activities in the parietal cortex highlights its 
significance as a neural interface for sensorimotor integration and indicates 
its critical role in vocal motor adaptation. Our findings support the notion 
that the parietal mechanisms are involved in driving adaptive motor behavior to 
cope with unexpected changes in the sensory environment to accomplish 
communication goals during vocal production and motor control.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-018-5272-9
PMID: 29696312 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Neurophysiol. 2017 Jul 1;118(1):383-393. doi: 10.1152/jn.00974.2016. Epub 2017 
Apr 12.

Implications of plan-based generalization in sensorimotor adaptation.

McDougle SD(1)(2), Bond KM(3), Taylor JA(3)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey; and 
mcdougle@princeton.edu.
(2)Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University, Princeton, New 
Jersey.
(3)Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey; and.

Generalization is a fundamental aspect of behavior, allowing for the transfer of 
knowledge from one context to another. The details of this transfer are thought 
to reveal how the brain represents what it learns. Generalization has been a 
central focus in studies of sensorimotor adaptation, and its pattern has been 
well characterized: Learning of new dynamic and kinematic transformations in one 
region of space tapers off in a Gaussian-like fashion to neighboring untrained 
regions, echoing tuned population codes in the brain. In contrast to common 
allusions to generalization in cognitive science, generalization in visually 
guided reaching is usually framed as a passive consequence of neural tuning 
functions rather than a cognitive feature of learning. While previous research 
has presumed that maximum generalization occurs at the instructed task goal or 
the actual movement direction, recent work suggests that maximum generalization 
may occur at the location of an explicitly accessible movement plan. Here we 
provide further support for plan-based generalization, formalize this theory in 
an updated model of adaptation, and test several unexpected implications of the 
model. First, we employ a generalization paradigm to parameterize the 
generalization function and ascertain its maximum point. We then apply the 
derived generalization function to our model and successfully simulate and fit 
the time course of implicit adaptation across three behavioral experiments. We 
find that dynamics predicted by plan-based generalization are borne out in the 
data, are contrary to what traditional models predict, and lead to surprising 
implications for the behavioral, computational, and neural characteristics of 
sensorimotor adaptation.NEW & NOTEWORTHY The pattern of generalization is 
thought to reveal how the motor system represents learned actions. Recent work 
has made the intriguing suggestion that maximum generalization in sensorimotor 
adaptation tasks occurs at the location of the learned movement plan. Here we 
support this interpretation, develop a novel model of motor adaptation that 
incorporates plan-based generalization, and use the model to successfully 
predict surprising dynamics in the time course of adaptation across several 
conditions.

Copyright © 2017 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00974.2016
PMCID: PMC5501918
PMID: 28404830 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Neuroscientist. 2015 Apr;21(2):109-25. doi: 10.1177/1073858414545228. Epub 2014 
Aug 13.

Sensorimotor adaptation: multiple forms of plasticity in motor circuits.

Della-Maggiore V(1), Landi SM(2), Villalta JI(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, University of Buenos Aires, 
Buenos Aires, Argentina vdellamaggiore@fmed.uba.ar.
(2)Laboratory of Neural Systems, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, University of Buenos Aires, 
Buenos Aires, Argentina.

One of the most striking properties of the adult central nervous system is its 
ability to undergo changes in function and/or structure. In mammals, learning is 
a major inducer of adaptive plasticity. Sensorimotor adaptation is a type of 
procedural--motor--learning that allows maintaining accurate movements in the 
presence of environmental or internal perturbations by adjusting motor output. 
In this work, we will review experimental evidence gathered from rodents and 
human and nonhuman primates pointing to possible sites of adaptation-related 
plasticity at different levels of organization of the nervous system.

© The Author(s) 2014.

DOI: 10.1177/1073858414545228
PMID: 25122611 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Neurophysiol. 2020 Oct 1;124(4):1122-1130. doi: 10.1152/jn.00242.2020. Epub 
2020 Sep 9.

Continuous reports of sensed hand position during sensorimotor adaptation.

Tsay JS(1)(2), Parvin DE(1)(2), Ivry RB(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, California.
(2)Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley, 
California.

Sensorimotor learning is thought to entail multiple learning processes, some 
volitional and others automatic. A new method to isolate implicit learning 
involves the use of a "clamped" visual perturbation in which, during a reaching 
movement, visual feedback is limited to a cursor that follows an invariant 
trajectory offset from the target by a fixed angle. Despite full awareness that 
the cursor movement is not contingent on their behavior, as well as explicit 
instructions to ignore the cursor, systematic changes in motor behavior are 
observed, and these changes have the signatures of motor adaptation observed in 
studies using classic visuomotor perturbations. Although it is clear that the 
response to clamped feedback occurs automatically, it remains unknown whether 
participants are sensitive to the large deviations in hand position that occur 
during adaptation. To address this question, we used the clamp method and asked 
participants to report their hand position after each reach. As expected, we 
observed robust deviations in hand angle away from the target (average of ∼18°). 
The hand reports also showed systematic deviations over the course of 
adaptation, initially attracted toward the visual feedback and then in the 
opposite direction, paralleling the shift in hand position. However, the shift 
in perceived hand position was subtle, reaching only ∼2° at asymptote. These 
results confirm that participants have limited awareness of the behavioral 
changes that occur during sensorimotor adaptation while revealing the impact of 
feedforward and feedback signals on their subjective experience.NEW & NOTEWORTHY 
Sensorimotor adaptation operates in an obligatory manner. Qualitatively, 
subjective reports obtained after adaptation demonstrate that, in many 
conditions, participants are unaware of significant changes in behavior. In the 
present study, we quantified participants' sensitivity to these adaptive changes 
by obtaining reports of hand position on a trial-by-trial basis. The results 
confirm that participants are largely unaware of adaptation but also reveal the 
subtle influence of feedback on their subjective experience.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00242.2020
PMCID: PMC7717163
PMID: 32902347

Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts of interest, financial or 
otherwise, are declared by the authors.


14. Eur J Neurosci. 2018 Mar;47(6):549-555. doi: 10.1111/ejn.13625. Epub 2017 Jul 
12.

Eye movements, sensorimotor adaptation and cerebellar-dependent learning in 
autism: toward potential biomarkers and subphenotypes.

Freedman EG(1), Foxe JJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, The Del Monte Institute for Neuroscience, 
University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY, 14642, 
USA.

Because of the wide range of symptoms expressed in individuals with autism 
spectrum disorder (ASD) and their idiosyncratic severity, it is unlikely that a 
single remedial approach will be universally effective. Resolution of this 
dilemma requires identifying subgroups within the autism spectrum, based on 
symptom set and severity, on an underlying neuro-structural difference, and on 
specific behavioral dysfunction. This will provide critical insight into the 
disorder and may lead to better diagnoses, and more targeted remediation in 
these subphenotypes of people with ASD. In this review, we discuss findings that 
appear to link the structure of the cerebellar vermis and plasticity of the 
saccadic eye-movement system in people with an autism spectrum disorder (ASD). 
Differences in cerebellar vermis structure in ASD could critically impact 
visuo-sensorimotor development in early infancy, which may in turn manifest as 
the visual orienting, communication and social interaction differences often 
seen in this population. It may be possible to distinguish a subpopulation of 
children with vermal hypoplasia, to establish whether this group manifests more 
severe deficits in visual orienting and in adaptation to persistent visual 
errors, and to establish whether this putative subphenotype of ASD is associated 
with a specific and distinct clinical symptom profile.

© 2017 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ejn.13625
PMID: 28612953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2010 Jul;34(8):1103-20. doi: 
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2009.12.010. Epub 2009 Dec 22.

Sensorimotor adaptation of saccadic eye movements.

Pélisson D(1), Alahyane N, Panouillères M, Tilikete C.

Author information:
(1)Espace et Action, U864, Inserm and University Lyon 1, Lyon, France. 
denis.pelisson@inserm.fr

Sensory-motor adaptation mechanisms play a pivotal role in maintaining the 
performance of goal-directed movements. The saccadic system, used to explore the 
visual environment through fast and accurate shifts of the eyes (saccades), is a 
valuable model for studying adaptation mechanisms. Significant progresses have 
been recently made in identifying the properties and neural substrates of 
saccadic adaptation elicited by the double-step target paradigm. Behavioural 
data collected in healthy and brain-damaged subjects, and neurophysiological 
data from non human primates, will be reviewed in an attempt to build a coherent 
picture of saccadic adaptation mechanisms. Emphasis will further be put on the 
contextual factors of saccadic adaptation, and on the link between adaptive 
changes of oculomotor commands and visual perception. It will be shown that 
saccadic adaptation relies on multiple mechanisms according to experimental 
contexts, time-scales, saccade categories, and direction of adaptive changes of 
saccade amplitude (shortening versus lengthening). Taking into account this 
complexity will be a key toward a comprehensive understanding of the 
physiopathology of saccadic adaptation and toward the development of possible 
rehabilitation procedures.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2009.12.010
PMID: 20026351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Acoust Soc Am. 2020 Feb;147(2):1163. doi: 10.1121/10.0000672.

Sensorimotor adaptation across the speech production workspace in response to a 
palatal perturbation.

Barbier G(1), Baum SR(2), Ménard L(3), Shiller DM(1).

Author information:
(1)École d'orthophonie et d'audiologie, Université de Montréal, Case Postale 
6128, Succursale Centre-Ville, Montréal, Québec, H3C 3J7, Canada.
(2)School of Communication Sciences and Disorders, McGill University, 2001 
McGill College Avenue, Suite 800, Montréal, Québec, H3A 1G1, Canada.
(3)Département de linguistique, Université du Québec à Montréal, Case Postale 
8888, Succursale Centre-Ville, Montréal, Québec, H3C 3P8, Canada.

Talkers have been shown to adapt the production of multiple vowel sounds 
simultaneously in response to altered auditory feedback. The present study 
extends this work by exploring the adaptation of speech production to a physical 
alteration of the vocal tract involving a palatal prosthesis that impacts both 
somatosensory and auditory feedback during the production of a range of 
consonants and vowels. Acoustic and kinematic measures of the tongue were used 
to examine the impact of the physical perturbation across the various speech 
sounds, and to assess learned changes following 20 min of speech practice 
involving the production of complex, variable sentences. As in prior studies, 
acoustic analyses showed perturbation and adaptation effects primarily for 
sounds directly involving interaction with the palate. Analyses of tongue 
kinematics, however, revealed systematic, robust effects of the perturbation and 
subsequent motor learning across the full range of speech sounds. The results 
indicate that speakers are able to reconfigure oral motor patterns during the 
production of multiple speech sounds spanning the articulatory workspace 
following a physical alteration of the vocal tract.

DOI: 10.1121/10.0000672
PMID: 32113266


17. Curr Opin Neurol. 2008 Dec;21(6):628-33. doi: 10.1097/WCO.0b013e328315a293.

Understanding sensorimotor adaptation and learning for rehabilitation.

Bastian AJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Kennedy Krieger Institute, Department of Neuroscience, Neurology, and 
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, The Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Understanding the behavioral mechanisms of sensorimotor 
adaptation and learning is essential for designing rational rehabilitation 
interventions.
RECENT FINDINGS: Adaptation is the trial-and-error process of adjusting movement 
to new demands and is now thought to be more than a simple error cancellation 
process. Instead, it may calibrate the brain's prediction of how the body will 
move and takes into account costs associated with the new task demand. Damage of 
the cerebellum systematically disrupts adaptation, but damage to other brain 
regions often does not. Adapting to perturbations driven by a device like a 
robot or a treadmill leads to only partial generalization to unconstrained 
'real-world' movements. Repeated adaptation can lead to learning a new motor 
calibration, but process of consolidation of this type of learning is less 
understood in patients.
SUMMARY: Adaptation is inherently important for rehabilitation by making 
movement flexible, but can also be used to ascertain whether some patients can 
generate a more normal motor pattern. Repeated adaptation can lead to learning 
of a new, more permanent motor calibration. Though less understood, this type of 
learning is likely to be an important method for making long-term improvements 
in patients' movement patterns.

DOI: 10.1097/WCO.0b013e328315a293
PMCID: PMC2954436
PMID: 18989103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Hum Brain Mapp. 2018 Apr;39(4):1516-1531. doi: 10.1002/hbm.23924. Epub 2017 Dec 
23.

Neural predictors of sensorimotor adaptation rate and savings.

Cassady K(1), Ruitenberg M(2), Koppelmans V(2), Reuter-Lorenz P(1), De Dios 
Y(3), Gadd N(3), Wood S(4), Riascos Castenada R(5), Kofman I(3), Bloomberg J(4), 
Mulavara A(3), Seidler R(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(2)School of Kinesiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MIichigan.
(3)KBRwyle Science, Technology, and Engineering Group, Houston, Texas.
(4)NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas.
(5)University of Texas Health Science Center, Houston, Texas.
(6)Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.

In this study, we investigate whether individual variability in the rate of 
visuomotor adaptation and multiday savings is associated with differences in 
regional gray matter volume and resting-state functional connectivity. 
Thirty-four participants performed a manual adaptation task during two separate 
test sessions, on average 9 days apart. Functional connectivity strength between 
sensorimotor, dorsal cingulate, and temporoparietal regions of the brain was 
found to predict the rate of learning during the early phase of the adaptation 
task. In contrast, default mode network connectivity strength was found to 
predict both the rate of learning during the late adaptation phase and savings. 
As for structural predictors, greater gray matter volume in temporoparietal and 
occipital regions predicted faster early learning, whereas greater gray matter 
volume in superior posterior regions of the cerebellum predicted faster late 
learning. These findings suggest that the offline neural predictors of early 
adaptation may facilitate the cognitive aspects of sensorimotor adaptation, 
supported by the involvement of temporoparietal and cingulate networks. The 
offline neural predictors of late adaptation and savings, including the default 
mode network and the cerebellum, likely support the storage and modification of 
newly acquired sensorimotor representations.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/hbm.23924
PMCID: PMC5847457
PMID: 29274105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2002 Nov;26(7):761-7. doi: 10.1016/s0149-7634(02)00063-5.

Sensorimotor adaptation in young and elderly humans.

Bock O(1), Schneider S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, German Sport University, D-50927, Köln, Germany. 
bock@dshs-koeln.de

Our brain's capacity for adaptation allows us to interact meaningfully with an 
ever-changing environment. Experimental evidence suggests that the time course 
of sensorimotor adaptation is preserved or only moderately degraded in old age, 
and that seniors benefit from a previous adaptive experience even more than 
younger subjects. However, experimental evidence suggests that sensorimotor 
adaptation seems to be associated with a higher computational load in the 
elderly. We discuss two possible explanations for this pattern of findings: 
Older adults may take longer to consolidate newly gained information into 
long-term motor memory, or they may have problems to utilize supplementary (e.g. 
cognitive) strategies. In any case, the age-related deficits were relatively 
mild. If these deficits are related to an increased computational load, it 
should be possible to reduce them by extended practice on adaptation tasks.

DOI: 10.1016/s0149-7634(02)00063-5
PMID: 12470687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Front Hum Neurosci. 2019 Feb 14;13:46. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2019.00046. 
eCollection 2019.

Decreased Temporal Sensorimotor Adaptation Due to Perturbation-Induced 
Measurement Noise.

Knelange EB(1), López-Moliner J(1).

Author information:
(1)Vision and Control of Action Group, Department of Cognition, Development and 
Psychology of Education, Institut de Neurociències, Universitat de Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain.

In daily life, we often need to make accurate and precise movements. However, 
our movements do not always end up as intended. When we are consistently too 
late to catch a ball for example, we need to update the predictions of the 
temporal consequences of our motor commands. These predictions can be improved 
when the brain evaluates sensory error signals. This is thought to be an optimal 
process, in which the relative reliabilities of the error signal and the 
prediction determine how much of an error is updated. Perturbation paradigms are 
used to identify how the brain learns from errors. Temporal perturbations 
(delays) between sensory signals impede the multisensory integration of these 
signals. Adaptation to these perturbations is often incomplete. We propose that 
the lack of adaptation is caused by an increased measurement noise that 
accompanies the temporal perturbation. We use a modification of the standard 
Kalman filter that allows for increases in measurement uncertainty with larger 
delays, and verify this model with a timing task on a screen. Participants were 
instructed to press a button when a ball reached a vertical line. Temporal 
feedback was given visually (unisensory consequence) or visually and auditory 
(multisensory consequence). The consequence of their button press was delayed 
incrementally with one ms per trial. Participants learned from their errors and 
started pressing the button earlier, but did not adapt fully. We found that our 
model, a Kalman filter with non-stationary measurement variance, could account 
for this pattern. Measurement variance increased less for the multisensory than 
the unisensory condition. In addition, we simulated our model's output for other 
perturbation paradigms and found that it could also account for fast 
de-adaptation. Our paper highlights the importance of evaluating changes in 
measurement noise when interpreting the results motor learning tasks that 
include perturbation paradigms.

DOI: 10.3389/fnhum.2019.00046
PMCID: PMC6382734
PMID: 30837854


21. J Neurophysiol. 2019 Apr 1;121(4):1575-1583. doi: 10.1152/jn.00794.2018. Epub 
2019 Mar 6.

Both fast and slow learning processes contribute to savings following 
sensorimotor adaptation.

Coltman SK(1)(2)(3), Cashaback JGA(4)(5), Gribble PL(2)(3)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Graduate Program in Neuroscience, Western University , London, Ontario , 
Canada.
(2)Brain and Mind Institute, Western University , London, Ontario , Canada.
(3)Department of Psychology, Western University , London, Ontario , Canada.
(4)Faculty of Kinesiology, University of Calgary , Calgary, Alberta , Canada.
(5)Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary , Calgary, Alberta , Canada.
(6)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Schulich School of Medicine & 
Dentistry, Western University , London, Ontario , Canada.
(7)Haskins Laboratories , New Haven, Connecticut.

Recent work suggests that the rate of learning in sensorimotor adaptation is 
likely not fixed, but rather can change based on previous experience. One 
example is savings, a commonly observed phenomenon whereby the relearning of a 
motor skill is faster than the initial learning. Sensorimotor adaptation is 
thought to be driven by sensory prediction errors, which are the result of a 
mismatch between predicted and actual sensory consequences. It has been proposed 
that during motor adaptation the generation of sensory prediction errors engages 
two processes (fast and slow) that differ in learning and retention rates. We 
tested the idea that a history of errors would influence both the fast and slow 
processes during savings. Participants were asked to perform the same force 
field adaptation task twice in succession. We found that adaptation to the force 
field a second time led to increases in estimated learning rates for both fast 
and slow processes. While it has been proposed that savings is explained by an 
increase in learning rate for the fast process, here we observed that the slow 
process also contributes to savings. Our work suggests that fast and slow 
adaptation processes are both responsive to a history of error and both 
contribute to savings. NEW & NOTEWORTHY We studied the underlying mechanisms of 
savings during motor adaptation. Using a two-state model to represent fast and 
slow processes that contribute to motor adaptation, we found that a history of 
error modulates performance in both processes. While previous research has 
attributed savings to only changes in the fast process, we demonstrated that an 
increase in both processes is needed to account for the measured behavioral 
data.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00794.2018
PMCID: PMC6485725
PMID: 30840553 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts of interest, financial or 
otherwise, are declared by the authors.


22. J Neurophysiol. 2020 Apr 1;123(4):1407-1419. doi: 10.1152/jn.00718.2019. Epub 
2020 Feb 26.

Sensorimotor adaptation and cue reweighting compensate for distorted 3D shape 
information, accounting for paradoxical perception-action dissociations.

Cesanek E(1), Taylor JA(2), Domini F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive, Linguistic, and Psychological Sciences, Brown 
University, Providence, Rhode Island.
(2)Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey.

Visually guided movements can show surprising accuracy even when the perceived 
three-dimensional (3D) shape of the target is distorted. One explanation of this 
paradox is that an evolutionarily specialized "vision-for-action" system 
provides accurate shape estimates by relying selectively on stereo information 
and ignoring less reliable sources of shape information like texture and 
shading. However, the key support for this hypothesis has come from studies that 
analyze average behavior across many visuomotor interactions where available 
sensory feedback reinforces stereo information. The present study, which 
carefully accounts for the effects of feedback, shows that visuomotor 
interactions with slanted surfaces are actually planned using the same 
cue-combination function as slant perception and that apparent dissociations can 
arise due to two distinct supervised learning processes: sensorimotor adaptation 
and cue reweighting. In two experiments, we show that when a distorted slant cue 
biases perception (e.g., surfaces appear flattened by a fixed amount), 
sensorimotor adaptation rapidly adjusts the planned grip orientation to 
compensate for this constant error. However, when the distorted slant cue is 
unreliable, leading to variable errors across a set of objects (i.e., some 
slants are overestimated, others underestimated), then relative cue weights are 
gradually adjusted to reduce the misleading effect of the unreliable cue, 
consistent with previous perceptual studies of cue reweighting. The speed and 
flexibility of these two forms of learning provide an alternative explanation of 
why perception and action are sometimes found to be dissociated in experiments 
where some 3D shape cues are consistent with sensory feedback while others are 
faulty.NEW & NOTEWORTHY When interacting with three-dimensional (3D) objects, 
sensory feedback is available that could improve future performance via 
supervised learning. Here we confirm that natural visuomotor interactions lead 
to sensorimotor adaptation and cue reweighting, two distinct learning processes 
uniquely suited to resolve errors caused by biased and noisy 3D shape cues. 
These findings explain why perception and action are often found to be 
dissociated in experiments where some cues are consistent with sensory feedback 
while others are faulty.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00718.2019
PMID: 32101506


23. J Cogn Neurosci. 2017 Jun;29(6):1061-1074. doi: 10.1162/jocn_a_01108. Epub 2017 
Feb 14.

Characteristics of Implicit Sensorimotor Adaptation Revealed by Task-irrelevant 
Clamped Feedback.

Morehead JR(1)(2), Taylor JA(3), Parvin DE(2), Ivry RB(2).

Author information:
(1)1 Harvard University.
(2)2 University of California, Berkeley.
(3)3 Princeton University.

Sensorimotor adaptation occurs when there is a discrepancy between the expected 
and actual sensory consequences of a movement. This learning can be precisely 
measured, but its source has been hard to pin down because standard adaptation 
tasks introduce two potential learning signals: task performance errors and 
sensory prediction errors. Here we employed a new method that induces sensory 
prediction errors without task performance errors. This method combines the use 
of clamped visual feedback that is angularly offset from the target and 
independent of the direction of motion, along with instructions to ignore this 
feedback while reaching to targets. Despite these instructions, participants 
unknowingly showed robust adaptation of their movements. This adaptation was 
similar to that observed with standard methods, showing sign dependence, local 
generalization, and cerebellar dependency. Surprisingly, adaptation rate and 
magnitude were invariant across a large range of offsets. Collectively, our 
results challenge current models of adaptation and demonstrate that behavior 
observed in many studies of adaptation reflect the composite effects of task 
performance and sensory prediction errors.

DOI: 10.1162/jocn_a_01108
PMCID: PMC5505262
PMID: 28195523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


24. PLoS One. 2018 Jan 26;13(1):e0191839. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0191839. 
eCollection 2018.

Sensorimotor adaptation of voice fundamental frequency in Parkinson's disease.

Abur D(1), Lester-Smith RA(1), Daliri A(1), Lupiani AA(1), Guenther FH(1)(2), 
Stepp CE(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Speech, Language, and Hearing Sciences, Boston University, 
Boston, MA, United States of America.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Boston University, Boston, MA, United 
States of America.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Boston University School 
of Medicine, Boston, MA, United States of America.

OBJECTIVE: This study examined adaptive responses to auditory perturbation of 
fundamental frequency (fo) in speakers with Parkinson's disease (PD) and control 
speakers.
METHOD: Sixteen speakers with PD and nineteen control speakers produced 
sustained vowels while they received perturbed auditory feedback (i.e., fo 
shifted upward or downward). Speakers' pitch acuity was quantified using a 
just-noticeable-difference (JND) paradigm. Twelve listeners provided estimates 
of the speech intelligibility for speakers with PD.
RESULTS: Fifteen responses from each speaker group for each shift direction were 
included in analyses. While control speakers generally showed consistent 
adaptive responses opposing the perturbation, speakers with PD showed no 
compensation on average, with individual PD speakers showing highly variable 
responses. In the PD group, the degree of compensation was not significantly 
correlated with age, disease progression, pitch acuity, or intelligibility.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate reduced adaptation to sustained fo 
perturbation and higher variability in PD compared to control participants. No 
significant differences were seen in pitch acuity between groups, suggesting 
that the fo adaptation deficit in PD is not the result of purely perceptual 
mechanisms.
SIGNIFICANCE: These results suggest there is an impairment in vocal motor 
control in PD. Building on these results, contributions can be made to 
developing targeted voice treatments for PD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0191839
PMCID: PMC5786318
PMID: 29373589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


25. Sci Rep. 2017 May 24;7(1):2366. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-02469-7.

Sensorimotor adaptation as a behavioural biomarker of early spinocerebellar 
ataxia type 6.

Panouillères MTN(1)(2), Joundi RA(3), Benitez-Rivero S(4), Cheeran B(4), Butler 
CR(4), Németh AH(4)(5), Miall RC(6), Jenkinson N(4)(7).

Author information:
(1)Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
United Kingdom. muriel.panouilleres@psy.ox.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United 
Kingdom. muriel.panouilleres@psy.ox.ac.uk.
(3)Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
United Kingdom.
(4)Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Clinical Genetics, Churchill Hospital, Oxford University 
Hospitals NHS Trust, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(6)School of Psychology, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom.
(7)School of Sport, Exercise and Rehabilitation Sciences, University of 
Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom.

Erratum in
    Sci Rep. 2018 Apr 30;8(1):7010.

Early detection of the behavioural deficits of neurodegenerative diseases may 
help to describe the pathogenesis of such diseases and establish important 
biomarkers of disease progression. The aim of this study was to identify how 
sensorimotor adaptation of the upper limb, a cerebellar-dependent process 
restoring movement accuracy after introduction of a perturbation, is affected at 
the pre-clinical and clinical stages of spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 (SCA6), an 
inherited neurodegenerative disease. We demonstrate that initial adaptation to 
the perturbation was significantly impaired in the eighteen individuals with 
clinical motor symptoms but mostly preserved in the five pre-clinical 
individuals. Moreover, the amount of error reduction correlated with the 
clinical symptoms, with the most symptomatic patients adapting the least. 
Finally both pre-clinical and clinical individuals showed significantly reduced 
de-adaptation performance after the perturbation was removed in comparison to 
the control participants. Thus, in this large study of motor features in SCA6, 
we provide novel evidence for the existence of subclinical motor dysfunction at 
a pre-clinical stage of SCA6. Our findings show that testing sensorimotor 
de-adaptation could provide a potential predictor of future motor deficits in 
SCA6.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-02469-7
PMCID: PMC5443763
PMID: 28539669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


26. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2015 Aug;33:71-7. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2015.03.003. Epub 
2015 Mar 28.

Dual-process decomposition in human sensorimotor adaptation.

Huberdeau DM(1), Krakauer JW(2), Haith AM(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, 
MD, United States.
(2)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, United 
States; Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, 
United States. Electronic address: jkrakau1@jhmi.edu.
(3)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, United 
States. Electronic address: adrian.haith@jhu.edu.

Multiple distinct learning processes are known to contribute to sensorimotor 
adaptation in humans. It is challenging to identify and characterize these 
multiple processes, however, because only their summed contribution can 
typically be observed. A general strategy for decomposing adaptation into its 
constituent components is to exploit their differential susceptibility to 
specific experimental manipulations. Several such approaches have recently 
emerged which, taken together, suggest that two fundamental systems operate 
together to achieve the adapted state: one system learns slowly, is implicit, is 
temporally stable over short breaks, is expressible at low reaction times, and 
its properties do not change based on experience. The second learns rapidly, is 
explicit, requires a long preparation time to be expressed, and exhibits 
long-term memory for prior learning.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.conb.2015.03.003
PMID: 25827272 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Neurophysiol. 2021 Feb 1;125(2):638-647. doi: 10.1152/jn.00466.2020. Epub 2020 
Dec 23.

Increased speech contrast induced by sensorimotor adaptation to a nonuniform 
auditory perturbation.

Parrell B(1)(2), Niziolek CA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Waisman Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin.
(2)Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin.

When auditory feedback is perturbed in a consistent way, speakers learn to 
adjust their speech to compensate, a process known as sensorimotor adaptation. 
Although this paradigm has been highly informative for our understanding of the 
role of sensory feedback in speech motor control, its ability to induce 
behaviorally relevant changes in speech that affect communication effectiveness 
remains unclear. Because reduced vowel contrast contributes to intelligibility 
deficits in many neurogenic speech disorders, we examine human speakers' ability 
to adapt to a nonuniform perturbation field that was designed to affect vowel 
distinctiveness, applying a shift that depended on the vowel being produced. 
Twenty-five participants were exposed to this "vowel centralization" feedback 
perturbation in which the first two formant frequencies were shifted toward the 
center of each participant's vowel space, making vowels less distinct from one 
another. Speakers adapted to this nonuniform shift, learning to produce corner 
vowels with increased vowel space area and vowel contrast to partially overcome 
the perceived centralization. The increase in vowel contrast occurred without a 
concomitant increase in duration and persisted after the feedback shift was 
removed, including after a 10-min silent period. These findings establish the 
validity of a sensorimotor adaptation paradigm to increase vowel contrast, 
showing that complex, nonuniform alterations to sensory feedback can 
successfully drive changes relevant to intelligible communication.NEW & 
NOTEWORTHY To date, the speech motor learning evoked in sensorimotor adaptation 
studies has had little ecological consequences for communication. By inducing 
complex, nonuniform acoustic errors, we show that adaptation can be leveraged to 
cause an increase in speech sound contrast, a change that has the capacity to 
improve intelligibility. This study is relevant for models of sensorimotor 
integration across motor domains, showing that complex alterations to sensory 
feedback can successfully drive changes relevant to ecological behavior.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00466.2020
PMCID: PMC7948141
PMID: 33356887

Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts of interest, financial or 
otherwise, are declared by the authors.


28. J Neurosci. 2020 Mar 18;40(12):2498-2509. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1862-19.2020. 
Epub 2020 Feb 7.

Spatially Distinct Beta-Band Activities Reflect Implicit Sensorimotor Adaptation 
and Explicit Re-aiming Strategy.

Jahani A(1), Schwey A(1), Bernier PM(2)(3), Malfait N(4).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Neurosciences de la Timone, Unité Mixte de Recherche 7289, Centre 
National de la Recherche Scientifique/Aix Marseille Université, 13385 Marseille 
Cedex 5, France.
(2)Département de Kinanthropologie, Faculté des Sciences de l'activité Physique, 
Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec J1H 5N4, Canada, and.
(3)Centre de Recherche du CHUS, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec J1H 
5N4, Canada.
(4)Institut de Neurosciences de la Timone, Unité Mixte de Recherche 7289, Centre 
National de la Recherche Scientifique/Aix Marseille Université, 13385 Marseille 
Cedex 5, France, nicole.malfait@univ-amu.fr nmalfait@gmail.com.

Previous research suggests that so-called implicit and explicit processes of 
motor adaptation are implemented by distinct neural structures. Here we tested 
whether implicit sensorimotor adaptation and strategic re-aiming used to reduce 
movement error are reflected by spatially distinct EEG oscillatory components. 
We analyzed beta-band oscillations (∼13-30 Hz), which have long been linked to 
sensorimotor functions, at the time when these adaptive processes intervene for 
movement planning. We hypothesized that beta-band activity within sensorimotor 
regions relates to implicit adaptive processes, whereas beta-band activity 
within medial motor areas reflects deliberate re-aiming. In female and male 
human volunteers, we recorded EEG in a motor adaptation task in which a visual 
rotation was introduced in short series of trials separated by unperturbed 
trials. Participants were instructed in advance about the nature of the visual 
perturbation and trained to counter it by strategically re-aiming at a 
neighboring target. Consistent with our hypothesis, we found that preparatory 
beta-band activities within the two regions exhibited different patterns of 
modulation. Beta power in lateral central regions was attenuated when a change 
in the visual condition rendered internal-model predictions uncertain. In 
contrast, beta power in medial frontal regions was selectively decreased when 
participants strategically re-aimed their reaches. We propose that the reduction 
in lateral central beta power reflects an increased weighting of peripheral 
sensory information implicitly triggered when an adaptive change in the 
sensorimotor mapping is required, whereas the reduction in medial frontal 
beta-band activity relates to the inhibition of automatic motor responses in 
favor of cognitively controlled movements.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT Behavioral and 
modeling studies have proposed that so-called implicit and explicit components 
of motor adaptation recruit different neural circuits. Here, we investigated 
whether these different processes are reflected by spatially distinct beta-band 
activities. Analyzing EEG signals at the time they influence movement planning, 
during the foreperiod, we found that beta power within lateral central regions 
was decreased when a change in visual conditions required implicit sensorimotor 
remapping, which may reflect enhanced sensory processing when internal-model 
predictions are rendered uncertain. In contrast, beta-band power within medial 
frontal areas was selectively attenuated when participants deliberately re-aimed 
their movements to improve task performance, which may be associated with the 
inhibition of automatic motor responses in favor of cognitively controlled 
movements.

Copyright © 2020 the authors.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1862-19.2020
PMCID: PMC7083525
PMID: 32034068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Neuropsychologia. 2021 Jan 8;150:107692. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2020.107692. Epub 2020 Nov 21.

Combined virtual reality and haptic robotics induce space and movement invariant 
sensorimotor adaptation.

Wilf M(1), Cerra Cheraka M(2), Jeanneret M(2), Ott R(2), Perrin H(3), 
Crottaz-Herbette S(4), Serino A(5).

Author information:
(1)MySpace Lab, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Lausanne University 
Hospital (CHUV), Lausanne, Switzerland. Electronic address: 
Meytal.Wilf@sheba.health.gov.il.
(2)MindMaze SA, Chemin de Roseneck 5, Lausanne, 1006, Switzerland.
(3)MySpace Lab, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Lausanne University 
Hospital (CHUV), Lausanne, Switzerland.
(4)Neuropsychology and Neurorehabilitation Service, Lausanne University Hospital 
(CHUV), Lausanne, Switzerland.
(5)MySpace Lab, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Lausanne University 
Hospital (CHUV), Lausanne, Switzerland; MindMaze SA, Chemin de Roseneck 5, 
Lausanne, 1006, Switzerland.

Prism adaptation is a method for studying visuomotor plasticity in healthy 
individuals, as well as for rehabilitating patients suffering spatial neglect. 
We developed a new set-up based on virtual-reality (VR) and haptic-robotics 
allowing us to induce sensorimotor adaptation and to reproduce the effect of 
prism adaptation in a more ecologically valid, yet experimentally controlled 
context. Participants were exposed to an immersive VR environment while 
controlling a virtual hand via a robotic-haptic device to reach virtual objects. 
During training, a rotational shift was induced between the position of the 
participant's real hand and that of the virtual hand in order to trigger 
sensorimotor recalibration. The use of VR and haptic-robotics allowed us to 
simulate and test multiple components of sensorimotor adaptation: training 
either peripersonal or extrapersonal space and testing generalization for the 
non-trained sector of space, and using active versus robot-guided reaching 
movements. Results from 60 neurologically intact participants show that 
participants exposed to the virtual shift were able to quickly adapt their 
reaching movements to aim correctly at the target objects. When the shift was 
removed, participants showed a systematic deviation of their movements during 
open-loop tasks in the direction opposite to that of the shift, which 
generalized to un-trained portions of space and occurred also when their 
movements were robotically-guided during the adaptation. Interestingly, 
follow-up questionnaires revealed that when the adaptation training was 
robotically-guided, participants were largely unaware of the mismatch between 
their hand and the virtual hand's position. The stability of the aftereffects, 
despite the changing experimental parameters, suggests that the induced 
sensory-motor adaptation does not rely on low-level processing of sensory 
stimuli during the training, but taps into high-level representations of space. 
Importantly, the flexibility of the trained space and the option of 
robotically-guided movements open novel possibilities of fine-tuning the 
training to patients' level of spatial and motor impairment, thus possibly 
resulting in a better outcome.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2020.107692
PMID: 33232695


30. Sci Rep. 2018 Sep 24;8(1):14286. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-32689-4.

Neural correlates of multi-day learning and savings in sensorimotor adaptation.

Ruitenberg MFL(1)(2), Koppelmans V(1)(3), De Dios YE(4), Gadd NE(4), Wood SJ(5), 
Reuter-Lorenz PA(6), Kofman I(4), Bloomberg JJ(5), Mulavara AP(4), Seidler 
RD(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)School of Kinesiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(2)Department of Experimental Psychology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(4)KBRwyle Science, Technology, and Engineering Group, Houston, TX, USA.
(5)NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(6)Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(7)School of Kinesiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. 
rachaelseidler@ufl.edu.
(8)Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. 
rachaelseidler@ufl.edu.
(9)Department of Applied Physiology & Kinesiology, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, FL, USA. rachaelseidler@ufl.edu.

In the present study we evaluated changes in neural activation that occur over 
the time course of multiple days of sensorimotor adaptation, and identified 
individual neural predictors of adaptation and savings magnitude. We collected 
functional MRI data while participants performed a manual adaptation task during 
four separate test sessions over a three-month period. This allowed us to 
examine changes in activation and associations with adaptation and savings at 
subsequent sessions. Participants exhibited reliable savings of adaptation 
across the four sessions. Brain activity associated with early adaptation 
increased across the sessions in a variety of frontal, parietal, cingulate, and 
temporal cortical areas, as well as various subcortical areas. We found that 
savings was positively associated with activation in several striatal, parietal, 
and cingulate cortical areas including the putamen, precuneus, angular gyrus, 
dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC), and cingulate motor area. These 
findings suggest that participants may learn how to better engage cognitive 
processes across days, potentially reflecting improvements in action selection. 
We propose that such improvements may rely on action-value assignments, which 
previously have been linked to the dACC and striatum. As correct movements are 
assigned a higher value than incorrect movements, the former are more likely to 
be performed again.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-32689-4
PMCID: PMC6155344
PMID: 30250049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


31. J Cogn Neurosci. 2021 Apr;33(4):563-573. doi: 10.1162/jocn_a_01668. Epub 2020 
Dec 30.

Prism Adaptation in M1.

Panico F(1), Fleury L(2)(3), Trojano L(1), Rossetti Y(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli," Caserta, Italy.
(2)Hospices Civils de Lyon, France.
(3)Trajectoires, Centre de Recherche en Neurosciences de Lyon, Bron, France.

During prism adaptation (PA), active exposure to an optical shift results in 
sustained modifications of the sensorimotor system, which have been shown to 
expand to the cognitive level and serve as a rehabilitation technique for 
spatial cognition disorders. Several models based on evidence from clinical and 
neuroimaging studies offered a description of the cognitive and the neural 
correlates of PA. However, recent findings using noninvasive neurostimulation 
call for a reexamination of the role of the primary motor cortex (M1) in PA. 
Specifically, recent studies demonstrated that M1 stimulation reactivates 
previously vanished sensorimotor changes 1 day after PA, induces after-effect 
strengthening, and boosts therapeutic effects up to the point of reversing 
treatment-resistant unilateral neglect. Here, we articulate findings from 
clinical, neuroimaging, and noninvasive brain stimulation studies to show that 
M1 contributes to acquiring and storing PA, by means of persisting latent 
changes after the behavioral training is terminated, consistent with studies on 
other sensorimotor adaptation procedures. Moreover, we describe the hierarchical 
organization as well as the timing of PA mechanisms and their anatomical 
correlates, and identify M1 as an anatomo-functional interface between low- and 
high-order PA-related mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1162/jocn_a_01668
PMID: 33378244


32. Front Syst Neurosci. 2014 Apr 8;8:56. doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2014.00056. eCollection 
2014.

Using virtual reality to augment perception, enhance sensorimotor adaptation, 
and change our minds.

Wright WG(1).

Author information:
(1)Physical Therapy and Bioengineering, Motion Analysis and Perception 
Laboratory, Temple University Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Technological advances that involve human sensorimotor processes can have both 
intended and unintended effects on the central nervous system (CNS). This mini 
review focuses on the use of virtual environments (VE) to augment brain 
functions by enhancing perception, eliciting automatic motor behavior, and 
inducing sensorimotor adaptation. VE technology is becoming increasingly 
prevalent in medical rehabilitation, training simulators, gaming, and 
entertainment. Although these VE applications have often been shown to optimize 
outcomes, whether it be to speed recovery, reduce training time, or enhance 
immersion and enjoyment, there are inherent drawbacks to environments that can 
potentially change sensorimotor calibration. Across numerous VE studies over the 
years, we have investigated the effects of combining visual and physical motion 
on perception, motor control, and adaptation. Recent results from our research 
involving exposure to dynamic passive motion within a visually-depicted VE 
reveal that short-term exposure to augmented sensorimotor discordance can result 
in systematic aftereffects that last beyond the exposure period. Whether these 
adaptations are advantageous or not, remains to be seen. Benefits as well as 
risks of using VE-driven sensorimotor stimulation to enhance brain processes 
will be discussed.

DOI: 10.3389/fnsys.2014.00056
PMCID: PMC3986528
PMID: 24782724


33. Trends Cogn Sci. 2016 Jul;20(7):535-544. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2016.05.002. Epub 
2016 May 31.

Taking Aim at the Cognitive Side of Learning in Sensorimotor Adaptation Tasks.

McDougle SD(1), Ivry RB(2), Taylor JA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA; 
Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, 
USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA; 
Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley, CA 
94720, USA. Electronic address: ivry@berkeley.edu.

Sensorimotor adaptation tasks have been used to characterize processes 
responsible for calibrating the mapping between desired outcomes and motor 
commands. Research has focused on how this form of error-based learning takes 
place in an implicit and automatic manner. However, recent work has revealed the 
operation of multiple learning processes, even in this simple form of learning. 
This review focuses on the contribution of cognitive strategies and heuristics 
to sensorimotor learning, and how these processes enable humans to rapidly 
explore and evaluate novel solutions to enable flexible, goal-oriented behavior. 
This new work points to limitations in current computational models, and how 
these must be updated to describe the conjoint impact of multiple processes in 
sensorimotor learning.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tics.2016.05.002
PMCID: PMC4912867
PMID: 27261056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Schizophr Bull. 2020 Mar 17;46(5):1202-9. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbaa019. Online 
ahead of print.

Prism Adaptation Deficits in Schizophrenia.

Bartolomeo LA(1), Shin YW(2), Block HJ(3), Bolbecker AR(1), Breier AF(4), 
O'Donnell B(1), Hetrick WP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences and Program in Neuroscience, 
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of 
Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
(3)Department of Kinesiology and Program in Neuroscience, Indiana University, 
Bloomington, IN.
(4)Department of Psychiatry and Prevention and the Recovery Center for Early 
Psychosis, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN.

Recent clinical and neurobehavioral evidence suggests cerebellar dysfunction in 
schizophrenia (SZ). We used the prism adaptation motor task (PAT) to probe 
specific cerebellar circuits in the disorder. PAT requires cerebellum-dependent 
motor adaptation, perceptual remapping, and strategic control. A failure to 
engage in early corrective processes may indicate impairment within either the 
cerebellum or regions contributing to strategic components, such as the parietal 
lobe, while an inability to develop and retain a visuomotor shift with time 
strongly suggests cerebellar impairment. Thirty-one individuals with SZ and 31 
individuals without a history of psychological disorders completed PAT. Subjects 
reached to a target before, during, and following prism exposure, while their 
movements were recorded using motion-sensing technology. The SZ group performed 
worse on conditions consisting of adaptation, post-adaptation, aftereffects, and 
reorientation, thereby demonstrating a failure to adapt to the same degree as 
healthy controls. SZ performance remained impaired even with visual feedback and 
did not differ from controls at baseline, suggesting the observed deficit is 
specific to adaptation. Results indicate that sensorimotor adaptation is 
impaired in SZ and implicate disturbances in cerebellar circuits.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Maryland Psychiatric Research Center.All rights reserved. For permissions, 
please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/schbul/sbaa019
PMCID: PMC7505168
PMID: 32185380


35. Mov Disord. 2013 Oct;28(12):1668-74. doi: 10.1002/mds.25588. Epub 2013 Jul 16.

Sensorimotor adaptation of speech in Parkinson's disease.

Mollaei F(1), Shiller DM, Gracco VL.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Research on Brain, Language and Music, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; 
School of Communication Sciences and Disorders, McGill University, Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada.

The basal ganglia are involved in establishing motor plans for a wide range of 
behaviors. Parkinson's disease (PD) is a manifestation of basal ganglia 
dysfunction associated with a deficit in sensorimotor integration and difficulty 
in acquiring new motor sequences, thereby affecting motor learning. Previous 
studies of sensorimotor integration and sensorimotor adaptation in PD have 
focused on limb movements using visual and force-field alterations. Here, we 
report the results from a sensorimotor adaptation experiment investigating the 
ability of PD patients to make speech motor adjustments to a constant and 
predictable auditory feedback manipulation. Participants produced speech while 
their auditory feedback was altered and maintained in a manner consistent with a 
change in tongue position. The degree of adaptation was associated with the 
severity of motor symptoms. The patients with PD exhibited adaptation to the 
induced sensory error; however, the degree of adaptation was reduced compared 
with healthy, age-matched control participants. The reduced capacity to adapt to 
a change in auditory feedback is consistent with reduced gain in the 
sensorimotor system for speech and with previous studies demonstrating 
limitations in the adaptation of limb movements after changes in visual feedback 
among patients with PD.

© 2013 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25588
PMCID: PMC3812368
PMID: 23861349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest/financial disclosures: 
Nothing to report.


36. J Neurophysiol. 2021 Jan 1;125(1):12-22. doi: 10.1152/jn.00493.2020. Epub 2020 
Nov 25.

The effect of visual uncertainty on implicit motor adaptation.

Tsay JS(1)(2), Avraham G(1)(2), Kim HE(3), Parvin DE(1)(2), Wang Z(1), Ivry 
RB(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, California.
(2)Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley, 
California.
(3)Department of Physical Therapy, University of Delaware, Newark, Delaware.

Sensorimotor adaptation is influenced by both the size and variance of error 
information. In the present study, we varied visual uncertainty and error size 
in a factorial manner and evaluated their joint effect on adaptation, using a 
feedback method that avoids inherent limitations with standard visuomotor tasks. 
Uncertainty attenuated adaptation, but only when the error was small. This 
striking interaction highlights a novel constraint for models of sensorimotor 
adaptation. Sensorimotor adaptation is driven by sensory prediction errors, the 
difference between the predicted and actual feedback. When the position of the 
feedback is made uncertain, motor adaptation is attenuated. This effect, in the 
context of optimal sensory integration models, has been attributed to the motor 
system discounting noisy feedback and thus reducing the learning rate. In its 
simplest form, optimal integration predicts that uncertainty would result in 
reduced learning for all error sizes. However, these predictions remain untested 
since manipulations of error size in standard visuomotor tasks introduce 
confounds in the degree to which performance is influenced by other learning 
processes such as strategy use. Here, we used a novel visuomotor task that 
isolates the contribution of implicit adaptation, independent of error size. In 
two experiments, we varied feedback uncertainty and error size in a factorial 
manner. At odds with the basic predictions derived from the optimal integration 
theory, the results show that uncertainty attenuated learning only when the 
error size was small but had no effect when the error size was large. We discuss 
possible mechanisms that may account for this interaction, considering how 
uncertainty may interact with the relevance assigned to the error signal or how 
the output of the adaptation system in terms of recalibrating the sensorimotor 
map may be modified by uncertainty.NEW & NOTEWORTHY Sensorimotor adaptation is 
influenced by both the size and variance of error information. In the present 
study, we varied visual uncertainty and error size in a factorial manner and 
evaluated their joint effect on adaptation, using a feedback method that avoids 
inherent limitations with standard visuomotor tasks. Uncertainty attenuated 
adaptation but only when the error was small. This striking interaction 
highlights a novel constraint for models of sensorimotor adaptation.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00493.2020
PMID: 33236937


37. PLoS Comput Biol. 2019 Mar 12;15(3):e1006298. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006298. 
eCollection 2019 Mar.

Spike burst-pause dynamics of Purkinje cells regulate sensorimotor adaptation.

Luque NR(1), Naveros F(2), Carrillo RR(2), Ros E(2), Arleo A(1).

Author information:
(1)Sorbonne Université, INSERM, CNRS, Institut de la Vision, Paris, France.
(2)Department of Computer Architecture and Technology, CITIC-University of 
Granada, Granada, Spain.

Cerebellar Purkinje cells mediate accurate eye movement coordination. However, 
it remains unclear how oculomotor adaptation depends on the interplay between 
the characteristic Purkinje cell response patterns, namely tonic, bursting, and 
spike pauses. Here, a spiking cerebellar model assesses the role of Purkinje 
cell firing patterns in vestibular ocular reflex (VOR) adaptation. The model 
captures the cerebellar microcircuit properties and it incorporates spike-based 
synaptic plasticity at multiple cerebellar sites. A detailed Purkinje cell model 
reproduces the three spike-firing patterns that are shown to regulate the 
cerebellar output. Our results suggest that pauses following Purkinje complex 
spikes (bursts) encode transient disinhibition of target medial vestibular 
nuclei, critically gating the vestibular signals conveyed by mossy fibres. This 
gating mechanism accounts for early and coarse VOR acquisition, prior to the 
late reflex consolidation. In addition, properly timed and sized Purkinje cell 
bursts allow the ratio between long-term depression and potentiation (LTD/LTP) 
to be finely shaped at mossy fibre-medial vestibular nuclei synapses, which 
optimises VOR consolidation. Tonic Purkinje cell firing maintains the 
consolidated VOR through time. Importantly, pauses are crucial to facilitate VOR 
phase-reversal learning, by reshaping previously learnt synaptic weight 
distributions. Altogether, these results predict that Purkinje spike burst-pause 
dynamics are instrumental to VOR learning and reversal adaptation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006298
PMCID: PMC6430425
PMID: 30860991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


38. PLoS One. 2017 Dec 4;12(12):e0189030. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0189030. 
eCollection 2017.

Long-term sensorimotor adaptation in the ocular following system of primates.

Hietanen MA(1)(2)(3), Price NSC(3)(4), Cloherty SL(1)(2)(3)(4), Hadjidimitrakis 
K(4), Ibbotson MR(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)National Vision Research Institute, Australian College of Optometry, Carlton, 
Victoria, Australia.
(2)ARC Centre of Excellence for Integrative Brain Function, University of 
Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
(3)Department of Optometry and Vision Sciences, University of Melbourne, 
Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
(4)Department of Physiology, Monash University, Victoria, Australia.

The sudden movement of a wide-field image leads to a reflexive eye tracking 
response referred to as short-latency ocular following. If the image motion 
occurs soon after a saccade the initial speed of the ocular following is 
enhanced, a phenomenon known as post-saccadic enhancement. We show in macaque 
monkeys that repeated exposure to the same stimulus regime over a period of 
months leads to progressive increases in the initial speeds of ocular following. 
The improvement in tracking speed occurs for ocular following with and without a 
prior saccade. As a result of the improvement in ocular following speeds, the 
influence of post-saccadic enhancement wanes with increasing levels of training. 
The improvement in ocular following speed following repeated exposure to the 
same oculomotor task represents a novel form of sensori-motor learning in the 
context of a reflexive movement.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0189030
PMCID: PMC5714349
PMID: 29200430 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


39. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 20;10(4):e0123321. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0123321. 
eCollection 2015.

Awareness of sensorimotor adaptation to visual rotations of different size.

Werner S(1), van Aken BC(2), Hulst T(2), Frens MA(3), van der Geest JN(2), 
Strüder HK(1), Donchin O(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Movement and Neurosciences, German Sport University, Cologne, 
Germany.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands; Erasmus 
University College, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Neuroscience, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands; 
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, 
Beer-Sheva, Israel.

Previous studies on sensorimotor adaptation revealed no awareness of the nature 
of the perturbation after adaptation to an abrupt 30° rotation of visual 
feedback or after adaptation to gradually introduced perturbations. Whether the 
degree of awareness depends on the magnitude of the perturbation, though, has as 
yet not been tested. Instead of using questionnaires, as was often done in 
previous work, the present study used a process dissociation procedure to 
measure awareness and unawareness. A naïve, implicit group and a group of 
subjects using explicit strategies adapted to 20°, 40° and 60° cursor rotations 
in different adaptation blocks that were each followed by determination of 
awareness and unawareness indices. The awareness index differed between groups 
and increased from 20° to 60° adaptation. In contrast, there was no group 
difference for the unawareness index, but it also depended on the size of the 
rotation. Early adaptation varied between groups and correlated with awareness: 
The more awareness a participant had developed the more the person adapted in 
the beginning of the adaptation block. In addition, there was a significant 
group difference for savings but it did not correlate with awareness. Our 
findings suggest that awareness depends on perturbation size and that aware and 
strategic processes are differentially involved during adaptation and savings. 
Moreover, the use of the process dissociation procedure opens the opportunity to 
determine awareness and unawareness indices in future sensorimotor adaptation 
research.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0123321
PMCID: PMC4404346
PMID: 25894396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


40. Front Syst Neurosci. 2015 Jul 6;9:100. doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2015.00100. 
eCollection 2015.

Individual predictors of sensorimotor adaptability.

Seidler RD(1), Mulavara AP(2), Bloomberg JJ(3), Peters BT(4).

Author information:
(1)Psychology, Kinesiology, Neuroscience, Neuromotor Behavior Laboratory, 
University of Michigan Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(2)Universities Space Research Association Houston, TX, USA ; NASA Johnson Space 
Center Houston, TX, USA.
(3)NASA Johnson Space Center Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Wyle Science, Technology and Engineering Group Houston, TX, USA.

There are large individual variations in strategies and rates of sensorimotor 
adaptation to spaceflight. This is seen in both the magnitude of performance 
disruptions when crewmembers are first exposed to microgravity, and in the rate 
of re-adaptation when they return to Earth's gravitational environment. 
Understanding the sources of this variation can lead to a better understanding 
of the processes underlying adaptation, as well as provide insight into 
potential routes for facilitating performance of "slow adapters". Here we review 
the literature on brain, behavioral, and genetic predictors of motor learning, 
recovery of motor function following neural insult, and sensorimotor adaptation. 
For example, recent studies have identified specific genetic polymorphisms that 
are associated with faster adaptation on manual joystick tasks and faster 
recovery of function following a stroke. Moreover, the extent of recruitment of 
specific brain regions during learning and adaptation has been shown to be 
predictive of the magnitude of subsequent learning. We close with suggestions 
for forward work aimed at identifying predictors of spaceflight adaptation 
success. Identification of "slow adapters" prior to spaceflight exposure would 
allow for more targeted preflight training and/or provision of booster training 
and adaptation adjuncts during spaceflight.

DOI: 10.3389/fnsys.2015.00100
PMCID: PMC4491631
PMID: 26217197


41. Eur J Neurosci. 2018 Dec;48(11):3397-3409. doi: 10.1111/ejn.14213. Epub 2018 Nov 
9.

Task errors contribute to implicit aftereffects in sensorimotor adaptation.

Leow LA(1), Marinovic W(2), de Rugy A(3), Carroll TJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Sensorimotor Performance, School of Human Movement and Nutrition 
Sciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.
(2)School of Psychology, Curtin University, Perth, Australia.
(3)Institut de Neurosciences Cognitives et Intégratives d'Aquitaine, CNRS, UMR 
5287, Université de Bordeaux, St Lucia, France.

Perturbations of sensory feedback evoke sensory prediction errors (discrepancies 
between predicted and actual sensory outcomes of movements), and reward 
prediction errors (discrepancies between predicted rewards and actual rewards). 
When our task is to hit a target, we expect to succeed in hitting the target, 
and so we experience a reward prediction error if the perturbation causes us to 
miss it. These discrepancies between intended task outcomes and actual task 
outcomes, termed "task errors," are thought to drive the use of strategic 
processes to restore success, although their role is incompletely understood. 
Here, as participants adapted to a 30° rotation of cursor feedback representing 
hand position, we investigated the role of task errors in sensorimotor 
adaptation: during target-reaching, we either removed task errors by moving the 
target mid-movement to align with cursor feedback of hand position, or enforced 
task error by moving the target away from the cursor feedback of hand position, 
by 20-30° randomly (clockwise in half the trials, counterclockwise in half the 
trials). Removing task errors not only reduced the extent of adaptation during 
exposure to the perturbation, but also reduced the amount of post-adaptation 
aftereffects that persisted despite explicit knowledge of the perturbation 
removal. Hence, task errors contribute to implicit adaptation resulting from 
sensory prediction errors. This suggests that the system which predicts the 
sensory consequences of actions via exposure to sensory prediction errors is 
also sensitive to reward prediction errors.

© 2018 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ejn.14213
PMID: 30339299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Vis. 2006 Feb 15;6(2):145-53. doi: 10.1167/6.2.5.

More evidence for sensorimotor adaptation in color perception.

Bompas A(1), O'Regan JK.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Psychologie Expérimentale, CNRS, Université René Descartes, 
France. aline.bompas@tuebingen.mpg.de

Sensorimotor adaptation can be defined as a perceptual adaptation whose effects 
depend on the occurrence and nature of the performed motor actions. Examples of 
sensorimotor adaptation can be found in the literature on prisms concerning 
several space-related attributes like orientation, curvature, and size. In this 
article, we show that sensorimotor adaptation can be obtained for color, as a 
consequence of the introduction of a new sensorimotor contingency between eye 
movements and color changes. In an adaptation phase, trials involved the 
successive presentation of two patches, first on the left, and then on the right 
or the opposite. The left patch being always red and the right patch green, a 
correlation is introduced between left-right (respectively right-left) eye 
saccades and red-green (respectively green-red) color change. After 40 min of 
adaptation, when two yellow patches are successively presented on each side of 
the screen, the chromaticity of the left and right patches need respectively to 
be shifted toward the chromaticity of the red and green adaptation patches for 
subjective equality to be obtained. When the eyes are kept fixed during the 
adaptation stage, creating a strong nonhomogeneity in retinal adaptation, no 
effect is found. This ensures that, if present, adaptation at a given retinal 
location cannot explain the present effect. A third experiment shows a 
dependency of the effect on the eyes' saccadic movements and not on the position 
on the screen, that is, on the position of the eyes in the orbits. These results 
argue for the involvement of sensorimotor mechanisms in color perception. The 
relation of these experimental findings toward a sensorimotor theory of color 
perception is discussed.

DOI: 10.1167/6.2.5
PMID: 16522141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


43. NeuroRehabilitation. 2011;29(2):185-95. doi: 10.3233/NRE-2011-0694.

Sensorimotor reconditioning during and after spaceflight.

Wood SJ(1), Loehr JA, Guilliams ME.

Author information:
(1)Universities Space Research Association, Houston, TX, USA NASA Johnson Space 
Center, Houston, TX, USA.

Exposure to microgravity drives adaptive changes in healthy individuals 
reconditioned for abnormal gravity states. These changes are maladaptive for 
return to earth's gravity. The intersubject variability of sensorimotor 
decrements is striking, although poorly understood. Multisensory integration, 
which is important for resolving sensory ambiguity on earth, is a critical 
mechanism for sensorimotor adaptation during and following space flight. The 
removal of gravitational loading also has profound effects that both negatively 
impact sensorimotor function and reduce capacity to overcome sensorimotor 
deficits. Countermeasure strategies include preflight training to facilitate 
transition to microgravity, pharmaceuticals and restriction of some activities 
early on orbit, and inflight exercise to minimize deconditioning during longer 
duration missions. Active motion is important to promote reconditioning upon 
return to earth's gravity. A supervised reconditioning program utilizes 
exercises that challenge multisensory integration with an increasing level of 
difficulty customized to the individual's state of recovery. This program also 
serves to increase crew self-awareness of fall risk. New resistive and aerobic 
exercise capabilities onboard the International Space Station contribute to 
improved postflight mobility. Lessons learned from inflight and postflight 
reconditioning programs have implications for future exploration crews that will 
operate more autonomously, as well as rehabilitation in clinical populations on 
earth.

DOI: 10.3233/NRE-2011-0694
PMID: 22027081 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


44. eNeuro. 2019 Jun 12;6(3):ENEURO.0190-19.2019. doi: 10.1523/ENEURO.0190-19.2019. 
Print 2019 May/Jun.

Dopamine Depletion Affects Vocal Acoustics and Disrupts Sensorimotor Adaptation 
in Songbirds.

Saravanan V(1), Hoffmann LA(1), Jacob AL(2), Berman GJ(2)(3), Sober SJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Graduate Program, Graduate Division of Biological and Biomedical 
Sciences, Laney Graduate School, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322.
(2)Department of Biology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322.
(3)Department of Physics, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322.
(4)Department of Biology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322 
samuel.j.sober@emory.edu.

Dopamine is hypothesized to convey error information in reinforcement learning 
tasks with explicit appetitive or aversive cues. However, during motor skill 
learning feedback signals arise from an animal's evaluation of sensory feedback 
resulting from its own behavior, rather than any external reward or punishment. 
It has previously been shown that intact dopaminergic signaling from the ventral 
tegmental area/substantia nigra pars compacta (VTA/SNc) complex is necessary for 
vocal learning when songbirds modify their vocalizations to avoid hearing 
distorted auditory feedback (playbacks of white noise). However, it remains 
unclear whether dopaminergic signaling underlies vocal learning in response to 
more naturalistic errors (pitch-shifted feedback delivered via headphones). We 
used male Bengalese finches (Lonchura striata var. domestica) to test the 
hypothesis that the necessity of dopamine signaling is shared between the two 
types of learning. We combined 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) lesions of 
dopaminergic terminals within Area X, a basal ganglia nucleus critical for song 
learning, with a headphones learning paradigm that shifted the pitch of auditory 
feedback and compared their learning to that of unlesioned controls. We found 
that 6-OHDA lesions affected song behavior in two ways. First, over a period of 
days lesioned birds systematically lowered their pitch regardless of the 
presence or absence of auditory errors. Second, 6-OHDA lesioned birds also 
displayed severe deficits in sensorimotor learning in response to pitch-shifted 
feedback. Our results suggest roles for dopamine in both motor production and 
auditory error processing, and a shared mechanism underlying vocal learning in 
response to both distorted and pitch-shifted auditory feedback.

Copyright © 2019 Saravanan et al.

DOI: 10.1523/ENEURO.0190-19.2019
PMCID: PMC6565373
PMID: 31126913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Cerebellum. 2020 Jun;19(3):370-382. doi: 10.1007/s12311-020-01116-8.

Locomotor Adaptation Is Associated with Microstructural Properties of the 
Inferior Cerebellar Peduncle.

Jossinger S(1), Mawase F(2), Ben-Shachar M(3)(4), Shmuelof L(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)The Gonda Multidisciplinary Brain Research Center, Bar-Ilan University, 
Ramat-Gan, Israel. sivanyoss@gmail.com.
(2)Faculty of Biomedical Engineering, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, 
Haifa, Israel.
(3)The Gonda Multidisciplinary Brain Research Center, Bar-Ilan University, 
Ramat-Gan, Israel.
(4)The Department of English Literature and Linguistics, Bar-Ilan University, 
Ramat-Gan, Israel.
(5)Zlotowski Center for Neuroscience, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, 
Beer-Sheva, Israel.
(6)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the 
Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel.
(7)Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, Ben-Gurion University of the 
Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel.

In sensorimotor adaptation paradigms, participants learn to adjust their 
behavior in response to an external perturbation. Locomotor adaptation and 
reaching adaptation depend on the cerebellum and are accompanied by changes in 
functional connectivity in cortico-cerebellar circuits. In order to gain a 
better understanding of the particular cerebellar projections involved in 
locomotor adaptation, we assessed the contribution of specific white matter 
pathways to the magnitude of locomotor adaptation and to long-term motor 
adaptation effects (recall and relearning). Diffusion magnetic resonance imaging 
with deterministic tractography was used to delineate the inferior and superior 
cerebellar peduncles (ICP, SCP) and the corticospinal tract (CST). Correlations 
were calculated to assess the association between the diffusivity values along 
the tracts and behavioral measures of locomotor adaptation. The results point to 
a significant correlation between the magnitude of adaptation and diffusivity 
values in the left ICP. Specifically, a higher magnitude of adaptation was 
associated with higher mean diffusivity and with lower anisotropy values in the 
left ICP, but not in other pathways. Post hoc analysis revealed that the effect 
stems from radial, not axial, diffusivity. The magnitude of adaptation was 
further associated with the degree of ICP lateralization, such that greater 
adaptation magnitude was correlated with increased rightward asymmetry of the 
ICP. Our findings suggest that the magnitude of locomotor adaptation depends on 
afferent signals to the cerebellum, transmitted via the ICP, and point to the 
contribution of error detection to locomotor adaptation rate.

DOI: 10.1007/s12311-020-01116-8
PMID: 32034666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


46. PLoS Comput Biol. 2019 Aug 9;15(8):e1006695. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006695. 
eCollection 2019 Aug.

A generative learning model for saccade adaptation.

Cassanello CR(1)(2), Ostendorf F(3), Rolfs M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience, Humboldt-Universität zu 
Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Department of Neurology, Charité - University Medicine Berlin, Berlin, 
Germany.

Plasticity in the oculomotor system ensures that saccadic eye movements reliably 
meet their visual goals-to bring regions of interest into foveal, high-acuity 
vision. Here, we present a comprehensive description of sensorimotor learning in 
saccades. We induced continuous adaptation of saccade amplitudes using a 
double-step paradigm, in which participants saccade to a peripheral target 
stimulus, which then undergoes a surreptitious, intra-saccadic shift (ISS) as 
the eyes are in flight. In our experiments, the ISS followed a systematic 
variation, increasing or decreasing from one saccade to the next as a sinusoidal 
function of the trial number. Over a large range of frequencies, we confirm that 
adaptation gain shows (1) a periodic response, reflecting the frequency of the 
ISS with a delay of a number of trials, and (2) a simultaneous drift towards 
lower saccade gains. We then show that state-space-based linear time-invariant 
systems (LTIS) represent suitable generative models for this evolution of 
saccade gain over time. This state-equation algorithm computes the prediction of 
an internal (or hidden state-) variable by learning from recent feedback errors, 
and it can be compared to experimentally observed adaptation gain. The algorithm 
also includes a forgetting rate that quantifies per-trial leaks in the 
adaptation gain, as well as a systematic, non-error-based bias. Finally, we 
study how the parameters of the generative models depend on features of the ISS. 
Driven by a sinusoidal disturbance, the state-equation admits an exact 
analytical solution that expresses the parameters of the phenomenological 
description as functions of those of the generative model. Together with 
statistical model selection criteria, we use these correspondences to 
characterize and refine the structure of compatible state-equation models. We 
discuss the relation of these findings to established results and suggest that 
they may guide further design of experimental research across domains of 
sensorimotor adaptation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006695
PMCID: PMC6703699
PMID: 31398185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


47. J Neuroeng Rehabil. 2017 Jul 13;14(1):74. doi: 10.1186/s12984-017-0279-1.

Sensorimotor Learning: Neurocognitive Mechanisms and Individual Differences.

Seidler RD(1), Carson RG(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Florida, P.O. Box 118205, Gainesville, FL, 32611-8205, USA. 
rachaelseidler@ufl.edu.
(2)Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
(3)Queen's University Belfast, Belfast, Ireland.

Erratum in
    J Neuroeng Rehabil. 2017 Oct 2;14(1):100.

Here we provide an overview of findings and viewpoints on the mechanisms of 
sensorimotor learning presented at the 2016 Biomechanics and Neural Control of 
Movement (BANCOM) conference in Deer Creek, OH. This field has shown substantial 
growth in the past couple of decades. For example it is now well accepted that 
neural systems outside of primary motor pathways play a role in learning. 
Frontoparietal and anterior cingulate networks contribute to sensorimotor 
adaptation, reflecting strategic aspects of exploration and learning. Longer 
term training results in functional and morphological changes in primary motor 
and somatosensory cortices. Interestingly, re-engagement of strategic processes 
once a skill has become well learned may disrupt performance. Efforts to predict 
individual differences in learning rate have enhanced our understanding of the 
neural, behavioral, and genetic factors underlying skilled human performance. 
Access to genomic analyses has dramatically increased over the past several 
years. This has enhanced our understanding of cellular processes underlying the 
expression of human behavior, including involvement of various 
neurotransmitters, receptors, and enzymes. Surprisingly our field has been slow 
to adopt such approaches in studying neural control, although this work does 
require much larger sample sizes than are typically used to investigate skill 
learning. We advocate that individual differences approaches can lead to new 
insights into human sensorimotor performance. Moreover, a greater understanding 
of the factors underlying the wide range of performance capabilities seen across 
individuals can promote personalized medicine and refinement of rehabilitation 
strategies, which stand to be more effective than "one size fits all" 
treatments.

DOI: 10.1186/s12984-017-0279-1
PMCID: PMC5508480
PMID: 28705227 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable for this review paper. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable for 
this review paper. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors have no competing interests 
to report. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.


48. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2018 Jun;92:41-49. doi: 
10.1016/j.psyneuen.2018.03.013. Epub 2018 Mar 27.

Psychosocial stress affects the acquisition of cerebellar-dependent sensorimotor 
adaptation.

Gheorghe DA(1), Panouillères MTN(2), Walsh ND(3).

Author information:
(1)University of East Anglia, United Kingdom.
(2)University of Oxford, United Kingdom.
(3)University of East Anglia, United Kingdom. Electronic address: 
nicholas.walsh@uea.ac.uk.

Despite being overlooked in theoretical models of stress-related disorders, 
differences in cerebellar structure and function are consistently reported in 
studies of individuals exposed to current and early-life stressors. However, the 
mediating processes through which stress impacts upon cerebellar function are 
currently unknown. The aim of the current experiment was to test the effects of 
experimentally-induced acute stress on cerebellar functioning, using a classic, 
forward saccadic adaptation paradigm in healthy, young men and women. Stress 
induction was achieved by employing the Montreal Imaging Stress Task (MIST), a 
task employing mental arithmetic and negative social feedback to generate 
significant physiological and endocrine stress responses. Saccadic adaptation 
was elicited using the double-step target paradigm. In the experiment, 48 
participants matched for gender and age were exposed to either a stress (n = 25) 
or a control (n = 23) condition. Saliva for cortisol analysis was collected 
before, immediately after, and 10, and 30 min after the MIST. Saccadic 
adaptation was assessed approximately 10 min after stress induction, when 
cortisol levels peaked. Participants in the stress group reported significantly 
more stress symptoms and exhibited greater total cortisol output compared to 
controls. The stress manipulation was associated with slower learning rates in 
the stress group, while control participants acquired adaptation faster. 
Learning rates were negatively associated with cortisol output and mood 
disturbance. Results suggest that experimentally-induced stress slowed 
acquisition of cerebellar-dependent saccadic adaptation, related to increases in 
cortisol output. These 'proof-of-principle' data demonstrate that stress 
modulates cerebellar-related functions.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2018.03.013
PMID: 29625374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


49. PLoS One. 2017 Jul 7;12(7):e0179977. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0179977. 
eCollection 2017.

Cerebellar anodal tDCS increases implicit learning when strategic re-aiming is 
suppressed in sensorimotor adaptation.

Leow LA(1), Marinovic W(1)(2), Riek S(1), Carroll TJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Sensorimotor Performance, School of Human Movement and Nutrition 
Sciences, Building 26B, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.
(2)School of Psychology and Speech Pathology, Building 401, Curtin University, 
Bentley, Perth, WA, Australia.

Neurophysiological and neuroimaging work suggests that the cerebellum is 
critically involved in sensorimotor adaptation. Changes in cerebellar function 
alter behaviour when compensating for sensorimotor perturbations, as shown by 
non-invasive stimulation of the cerebellum and studies involving patients with 
cerebellar degeneration. It is known, however, that behavioural responses to 
sensorimotor perturbations reflect both explicit processes (such as volitional 
aiming to one side of a target to counteract a rotation of visual feedback) and 
implicit, error-driven updating of sensorimotor maps. The contribution of the 
cerebellum to these explicit and implicit processes remains unclear. Here, we 
examined the role of the cerebellum in sensorimotor adaptation to a 30° rotation 
of visual feedback of hand position during target-reaching, when the capacity to 
use explicit processes was manipulated by controlling movement preparation 
times. Explicit re-aiming was suppressed in one condition by requiring subjects 
to initiate their movements within 300ms of target presentation, and permitted 
in another condition by requiring subjects to wait approximately 1050ms after 
target presentation before movement initiation. Similar to previous work, 
applying anodal transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS; 1.5mA) to the 
right cerebellum during adaptation resulted in faster compensation for errors 
imposed by the rotation. After exposure to the rotation, we evaluated implicit 
remapping in no-feedback trials after providing participants with explicit 
knowledge that the rotation had been removed. Crucially, movements were more 
adapted in these no-feedback trials following cerebellar anodal tDCS than after 
sham stimulation in both long and short preparation groups. Thus, cerebellar 
anodal tDCS increased implicit remapping during sensorimotor adaptation, 
irrespective of preparation time constraints. The results are consistent with 
the possibility that the cerebellum contributes to the formation of new 
visuomotor maps that correct perturbations in sensory feedback, even when 
explicit processes are suppressed during sensorimotor adaptation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0179977
PMCID: PMC5501480
PMID: 28686607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


50. Sci Rep. 2018 Apr 30;8(1):7010. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-25324-9.

Author Correction: Sensorimotor adaptation as a behavioural biomarker of early 
spinocerebellar ataxia type 6.

Panouillères MTN(1)(2), Joundi RA(3), Benitez-Rivero S(4), Cheeran B(4), Butler 
CR(4), Németh AH(4)(5), Miall RC(6), Jenkinson N(4)(7).

Author information:
(1)Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
United Kingdom. muriel.panouilleres@psy.ox.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United 
Kingdom. muriel.panouilleres@psy.ox.ac.uk.
(3)Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
United Kingdom.
(4)Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Clinical Genetics, Churchill Hospital, Oxford University 
Hospitals NHS Trust, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(6)School of Psychology, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom.
(7)School of Sport, Exercise and Rehabilitation Sciences, University of 
Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom.

Erratum for
    Sci Rep. 2017 May 24;7(1):2366.

A correction has been published and is appended to both the HTML and PDF 
versions of this paper. The error has been fixed in the paper.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-25324-9
PMCID: PMC5928122
PMID: 29712974


51. Exp Brain Res. 2019 May;237(5):1303-1313. doi: 10.1007/s00221-019-05509-y. Epub 
2019 Mar 12.

Movements following force-field adaptation are aligned with altered sense of 
limb position.

Ohashi H(1), Valle-Mena R(1), Gribble PL(1)(2), Ostry DJ(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Haskins Laboratories, New Haven, CT, USA.
(2)Western University, London, ON, Canada.
(3)Haskins Laboratories, New Haven, CT, USA. david.ostry@mcgill.ca.
(4)Department of Psychology, McGill University, 2001 McGill College, Montreal, 
QC, H3A 1G1, Canada. david.ostry@mcgill.ca.

Previous work has shown that motor learning is associated with changes to both 
movements and to the somatosensory perception of limb position. In an earlier 
study that motivates the current work, it appeared that following washout 
trials, movements did not return to baseline but rather were aligned with 
associated changes to sensed limb position. Here, we provide a systematic test 
of this relationship, examining the idea that adaptation-related changes to 
sensed limb position and to the path of the limb are linked, not only after 
washout trials but at all stages of the adaptation process. We used a 
force-field adaptation paradigm followed by washout trials in which subjects 
performed movements without visual feedback of the limb. Tests of sensed limb 
position were conducted at each phase of adaptation, specifically before and 
after baseline movements in a null field, after force-field adaptation, and 
following washout trials in a null field. As in previous work, sensed limb 
position changed in association with force-field adaptation. At each stage of 
adaptation, we observed a correlation between the sensed limb position and 
associated path of the limb. At a group level, there were differences between 
the clockwise and counter-clockwise conditions. However, whenever there were 
changes in sensed limb position, movements following washout did not return to 
baseline. This suggests that adaptation in sensory and motor systems is not 
independent processes but rather sensorimotor adaptation is linked to sensory 
change. Sensory change and limb movement remain in alignment throughout 
adaptation such that the path of the limb is aligned with the altered sense of 
limb position.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-019-05509-y
PMCID: PMC6556780
PMID: 30863880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Brain Lang. 2020 Oct;209:104840. doi: 10.1016/j.bandl.2020.104840. Epub 2020 Jul 
29.

Noninvasive neurostimulation of left ventral motor cortex enhances sensorimotor 
adaptation in speech production.

Scott TL(1), Haenchen L(2), Daliri A(3), Chartove J(4), Guenther FH(5), 
Perrachione TK(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Speech, Language, & Hearing Sciences, Boston University, 
Boston, MA 02215, United States; Graduate Program for Neuroscience, Boston 
University, Boston, MA 02215, United States.
(2)Department of Speech, Language, & Hearing Sciences, Boston University, 
Boston, MA 02215, United States.
(3)Department of Speech, Language, & Hearing Sciences, Boston University, 
Boston, MA 02215, United States; College of Health Solutions, Arizona State 
University, Tempe, AZ 85287, United States.
(4)Graduate Program for Neuroscience, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215, 
United States.
(5)Department of Speech, Language, & Hearing Sciences, Boston University, 
Boston, MA 02215, United States; Department of Biomedical Engineering, Boston 
University, Boston, MA 02215, United States.
(6)Department of Speech, Language, & Hearing Sciences, Boston University, 
Boston, MA 02215, United States. Electronic address: tkp@bu.edu.

Sensorimotor adaptation-enduring changes to motor commands due to sensory 
feedback-allows speakers to match their articulations to intended speech 
acoustics. How the brain integrates auditory feedback to modify speech motor 
commands and what limits the degree of these modifications remain unknown. Here, 
we investigated the role of speech motor cortex in modifying stored speech motor 
plans. In a within-subjects design, participants underwent separate sessions of 
sham and anodal transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) over speech motor 
cortex while speaking and receiving altered auditory feedback of the first 
formant. Anodal tDCS increased the rate of sensorimotor adaptation for feedback 
perturbation. Computational modeling of our results using the Directions Into 
Velocities of Articulators (DIVA) framework of speech production suggested that 
tDCS primarily affected behavior by increasing the feedforward learning rate. 
This study demonstrates how focal noninvasive neurostimulation can enhance the 
integration of auditory feedback into speech motor plans.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bandl.2020.104840
PMCID: PMC7484095
PMID: 32738502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Sci Rep. 2019 Sep 19;9(1):13582. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-49074-4.

Learning and adaptation in speech production without a vocal tract.

Thompson MMC(1)(2)(3), Houde JF(4), Nagarajan SS(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, University of California, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(2)UC Berkeley-UCSF Graduate Program in Bioengineering, University of 
California, San Francisco, USA.
(3)Department of Speech, Language and Hearing Sciences, Boston University, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, University of California, 
San Francisco, CA, USA. jfhoude@ucsf.edu.
(5)UC Berkeley-UCSF Graduate Program in Bioengineering, University of 
California, San Francisco, USA. sri@ucsf.edu.
(6)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, University of California, 
San Francisco, CA, USA. sri@ucsf.edu.
(7)Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, University of California, San 
Francisco, CA, USA. sri@ucsf.edu.

How is the complex audiomotor skill of speaking learned? To what extent does it 
depend on the specific characteristics of the vocal tract? Here, we developed a 
touchscreen-based speech synthesizer to examine learning of speech production 
independent of the vocal tract. Participants were trained to reproduce heard 
vowel targets by reaching to locations on the screen without visual feedback and 
receiving endpoint vowel sound auditory feedback that depended continuously on 
touch location. Participants demonstrated learning as evidenced by rapid 
increases in accuracy and consistency in the production of trained targets. This 
learning generalized to productions of novel vowel targets. Subsequent to 
learning, sensorimotor adaptation was observed in response to changes in the 
location-sound mapping. These findings suggest that participants learned 
adaptable sensorimotor maps allowing them to produce desired vowel sounds. These 
results have broad implications for understanding the acquisition of speech 
motor control.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-49074-4
PMCID: PMC6753102
PMID: 31537824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


54. Exp Brain Res. 2018 Dec;236(12):3417-3426. doi: 10.1007/s00221-018-5388-y. Epub 
2018 Oct 8.

Correlations between executive functions and adaptation to incrementally 
increasing sensorimotor discordances.

Schmitz G(1), Dierking M(2), Guenther A(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Sports Science, Leibniz University Hannover, Am Moritzwinkel 6, 
30167, Hannover, Germany. gerd.schmitz@sportwiss.uni-hannover.de.
(2)Institute of Sports Science, Leibniz University Hannover, Am Moritzwinkel 6, 
30167, Hannover, Germany.

A previous study reported that movement directions adapt much better to 60° 
target displacements (double steps) when target displacements are introduced 
incrementally and not abruptly. The present study tested whether incremental 
adaptation to 60° discordances can be explained by specific cognitive abilities. 
The results showed that an increase of discordance size during adaptation 
enhanced reaction times. Furthermore, the individual performance in 
neuropsychological tests measuring sustained attention, figural fluency and 
perseveration predicted the rate of adaptation at different discordance sizes. 
These results are discussed with reference to recent models on directional 
selectivity and modularity during visually guided reaching.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-018-5388-y
PMID: 30298293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Cereb Cortex. 2014 Feb;24(2):304-14. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhs312. Epub 2012 Oct 
5.

A role for the parietal cortex in sensorimotor adaptation of saccades.

Panouillères M(1), Habchi O, Gerardin P, Salemme R, Urquizar C, Farne A, 
Pélisson D.

Author information:
(1)ImpAct Team, Centre de Recherche en Neurosciences de Lyon, INSERM U1028; CNRS 
UMR5292; Lyon University, 69676 Bron Cedex, France.

Sensorimotor adaptation ensures movement accuracy despite continuously changing 
environment and body. Adaptation of saccadic eye movements is a classical model 
of sensorimotor adaptation. Beside the well-established role of the 
brainstem-cerebellum in the adaptation of reactive saccades (RSs), the cerebral 
cortex has been suggested to be involved in the adaptation of voluntary saccades 
(VSs). Here, we provide direct evidence for a causal involvement of the parietal 
cortex in saccadic adaptation. First, the posterior intraparietal sulcus (pIPS) 
was identified in each subject using functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(fMRI). Then, a saccadic adaptation paradigm was used to progressively reduce 
the amplitude of RSs and VSs, while single-pulse transcranial magnetic 
stimulation (spTMS) was applied over the right pIPS. The perturbations of pIPS 
resulted in impairment for the adaptation of VSs, selectively when spTMS was 
applied 60 ms after saccade onset. In contrast, the adaptation of RSs was 
facilitated by spTMS applied 90 ms after saccade initiation. The differential 
effect of spTMS relative to saccade types suggests a direct interference with 
pIPS activity for the VS adaptation and a remote interference with 
brainstem-cerebellum activity for the RS adaptation. These results support the 
hypothesis that the adaptation of VSs and RSs involves different neuronal 
substrates.

DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bhs312
PMID: 23042755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Brain Stimul. 2019 Jul-Aug;12(4):992-1000. doi: 10.1016/j.brs.2019.03.008. Epub 
2019 Mar 13.

Individual differences in TMS sensitivity influence the efficacy of tDCS in 
facilitating sensorimotor adaptation.

Labruna L(1), Stark-Inbar A(2), Breska A(2), Dabit M(3), Vanderschelden B(3), 
Nitsche MA(4), Ivry RB(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, 94704, Berkeley, CA, USA; 
Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California, 94704, Berkeley, 
CA, USA. Electronic address: lulabrun@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of California, 94704, Berkeley, CA, USA; 
Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California, 94704, Berkeley, 
CA, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of California, 94704, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(4)Leibniz Research Center for Working Environment and Human Factors, 44139, 
Dortmund, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) can enhance cognitive 
function in healthy individuals, with promising applications as a therapeutic 
intervention. Despite this potential, variability in the efficacy of tDCS has 
been a considerable concern.
OBJECTIVE: /Hypothesis: Given that tDCS is always applied at a set intensity, we 
examined whether individual differences in sensitivity to brain stimulation 
might be one variable that modulates the efficacy of tDCS in a motor learning 
task.
METHODS: In the first part of the experiment, single-pulse transcranial magnetic 
stimulation (TMS) over primary motor cortex (M1) was used to determine each 
participant's resting motor threshold (rMT). This measure was used as a proxy of 
individual sensitivity to brain stimulation. In an experimental group of 28 
participants, 2 mA tDCS was then applied during a motor learning task with the 
anodal electrode positioned over left M1. Another 14 participants received sham 
stimulation.
RESULTS: M1-Anodal tDCS facilitated learning relative to participants who 
received sham stimulation. Of primary interest was a within-group analysis of 
the experimental group, showing that the rate of learning was positively 
correlated with rMT: Participants who were more sensitive to brain stimulation 
as operationalized by our TMS proxy (low rMT), showed faster adaptation.
CONCLUSIONS: Methodologically, the results indicate that TMS sensitivity can 
predict tDCS efficacy in a behavioral task, providing insight into one source of 
variability that may contribute to replication problems with tDCS. 
Theoretically, the results provide further evidence of a role of sensorimotor 
cortex in adaptation, with the boost from tDCS observed during acquisition.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brs.2019.03.008
PMCID: PMC6592723
PMID: 30930208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest disclosure The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.


57. J Neurosci. 2021 Mar 24;41(12):2747-2761. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2125-20.2021. 
Epub 2021 Feb 8.

Did We Get Sensorimotor Adaptation Wrong? Implicit Adaptation as Direct Policy 
Updating Rather than Forward-Model-Based Learning.

Hadjiosif AM(1), Krakauer JW(2)(3)(4)(5), Haith AM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology alkis@jhmi.edu.
(2)Department of Neurology.
(3)Department of Neuroscience.
(4)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21287.
(5)Santa Fe Institute, Santa Fe, New Mexico 87501.

The human motor system can rapidly adapt its motor output in response to errors. 
The prevailing theory of this process posits that the motor system adapts an 
internal forward model that predicts the consequences of outgoing motor commands 
and uses this forward model to plan future movements. However, despite clear 
evidence that adaptive forward models exist and are used to help track the state 
of the body, there is no definitive evidence that such models are used in 
movement planning. An alternative to the forward-model-based theory of 
adaptation is that movements are generated based on a learned policy that is 
adjusted over time by movement errors directly ("direct policy learning"). This 
learning mechanism could act in parallel with, but independent of, any updates 
to a predictive forward model. Forward-model-based learning and direct policy 
learning generate very similar predictions about behavior in conventional 
adaptation paradigms. However, across three experiments with human participants 
(N = 47, 26 female), we show that these mechanisms can be dissociated based on 
the properties of implicit adaptation under mirror-reversed visual feedback. 
Although mirror reversal is an extreme perturbation, it still elicits implicit 
adaptation; however, this adaptation acts to amplify rather than to reduce 
errors. We show that the pattern of this adaptation over time and across targets 
is consistent with direct policy learning but not forward-model-based learning. 
Our findings suggest that the forward-model-based theory of adaptation needs to 
be re-examined and that direct policy learning provides a more plausible 
explanation of implicit adaptation.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT The ability of our 
brain to adapt movements in response to error is one of the most widely studied 
phenomena in motor learning. Yet, we still do not know the process by which 
errors eventually result in adaptation. It is known that the brain maintains and 
updates an internal forward model, which predicts the consequences of motor 
commands, and the prevailing theory of motor adaptation posits that this updated 
forward model is responsible for trial-by-trial adaptive changes. Here, we 
question this view and show instead that adaptation is better explained by a 
simpler process whereby motor output is directly adjusted by task errors. Our 
findings cast doubt on long-held beliefs about adaptation.

Copyright © 2021 the authors.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2125-20.2021
PMID: 33558432


58. Front Psychol. 2020 Jan 21;10:2995. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02995. eCollection 
2019.

A Simple 3-Parameter Model for Examining Adaptation in Speech and Voice 
Production.

Kearney E(1), Nieto-Castañón A(1), Weerathunge HR(2), Falsini R(1), Daliri A(3), 
Abur D(1), Ballard KJ(4), Chang SE(5)(6), Chao SC(3), Heller Murray ES(1), Scott 
TL(7), Guenther FH(1)(2)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Speech, Language, and Hearing Sciences, Boston University, 
Boston, MA, United States.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Boston University, Boston, MA, United 
States.
(3)Department of Speech and Hearing Science, Arizona State University, Tempe, 
AZ, United States.
(4)Faculty of Health Sciences, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United 
States.
(6)Cognitive Imaging Research Center, Department of Radiology, Michigan State 
University, East Lansing, MI, United States.
(7)Graduate Program for Neuroscience, Boston University, Boston, MA, United 
States.
(8)The Picower Institute for Learning and Memory, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, MA, United States.
(9)Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Charlestown, MA, United States.

Sensorimotor adaptation experiments are commonly used to examine motor learning 
behavior and to uncover information about the underlying control mechanisms of 
many motor behaviors, including speech production. In the speech and voice 
domains, aspects of the acoustic signal are shifted/perturbed over time via 
auditory feedback manipulations. In response, speakers alter their production in 
the opposite direction of the shift so that their perceived production is closer 
to what they intended. This process relies on a combination of feedback and 
feedforward control mechanisms that are difficult to disentangle. The current 
study describes and tests a simple 3-parameter mathematical model that 
quantifies the relative contribution of feedback and feedforward control 
mechanisms to sensorimotor adaptation. The model is a simplified version of the 
DIVA model, an adaptive neural network model of speech motor control. The three 
fitting parameters of SimpleDIVA are associated with the three key subsystems 
involved in speech motor control, namely auditory feedback control, 
somatosensory feedback control, and feedforward control. The model is tested 
through computer simulations that identify optimal model fits to six existing 
sensorimotor adaptation datasets. We show its utility in (1) interpreting the 
results of adaptation experiments involving the first and second formant 
frequencies as well as fundamental frequency; (2) assessing the effects of 
masking noise in adaptation paradigms; (3) fitting more than one perturbation 
dimension simultaneously; (4) examining sensorimotor adaptation at different 
timepoints in the production signal; and (5) quantitatively predicting responses 
in one experiment using parameters derived from another experiment. The model 
simulations produce excellent fits to real data across different types of 
perturbations and experimental paradigms (mean correlation between data and 
model fits across all six studies = 0.95 ± 0.02). The model parameters provide a 
mechanistic explanation for the behavioral responses to the adaptation paradigm 
that are not readily available from the behavioral responses alone. Overall, 
SimpleDIVA offers new insights into speech and voice motor control and has the 
potential to inform future directions of speech rehabilitation research in 
disordered populations. Simulation software, including an easy-to-use graphical 
user interface, is publicly available to facilitate the use of the model in 
future studies.

Copyright © 2020 Kearney, Nieto-Castañón, Weerathunge, Falsini, Daliri, Abur, 
Ballard, Chang, Chao, Heller Murray, Scott and Guenther.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02995
PMCID: PMC6985569
PMID: 32038381


59. J Neurophysiol. 2017 Sep 1;118(3):1622-1636. doi: 10.1152/jn.00451.2017. Epub 
2017 Jun 21.

The cerebellum does more than sensory prediction error-based learning in 
sensorimotor adaptation tasks.

Butcher PA(1)(2), Ivry RB(3)(4), Kuo SH(5), Rydz D(5), Krakauer JW(6), Taylor 
JA(7)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey; 
pbutcher@berkeley.edu.
(2)Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University, Princeton, New 
Jersey.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, California.
(4)Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley, 
California.
(5)Department of Neurology, Columbia Medical Center, Columbia University, New 
York, New York; and.
(6)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland.
(7)Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey.

Individuals with damage to the cerebellum perform poorly in sensorimotor 
adaptation paradigms. This deficit has been attributed to impairment in sensory 
prediction error-based updating of an internal forward model, a form of implicit 
learning. These individuals can, however, successfully counter a perturbation 
when instructed with an explicit aiming strategy. This successful use of an 
instructed aiming strategy presents a paradox: In adaptation tasks, why do 
individuals with cerebellar damage not come up with an aiming solution on their 
own to compensate for their implicit learning deficit? To explore this question, 
we employed a variant of a visuomotor rotation task in which, before executing a 
movement on each trial, the participants verbally reported their intended aiming 
location. Compared with healthy control participants, participants with 
spinocerebellar ataxia displayed impairments in both implicit learning and 
aiming. This was observed when the visuomotor rotation was introduced abruptly 
(experiment 1) or gradually (experiment 2). This dual deficit does not appear to 
be related to the increased movement variance associated with ataxia: Healthy 
undergraduates showed little change in implicit learning or aiming when their 
movement feedback was artificially manipulated to produce similar levels of 
variability (experiment 3). Taken together the results indicate that a 
consequence of cerebellar dysfunction is not only impaired sensory prediction 
error-based learning but also a difficulty in developing and/or maintaining an 
aiming solution in response to a visuomotor perturbation. We suggest that this 
dual deficit can be explained by the cerebellum forming part of a network that 
learns and maintains action-outcome associations across trials.NEW & NOTEWORTHY 
Individuals with cerebellar pathology are impaired in sensorimotor adaptation. 
This deficit has been attributed to an impairment in error-based learning, 
specifically, from a deficit in using sensory prediction errors to update an 
internal model. Here we show that these individuals also have difficulty in 
discovering an aiming solution to overcome their adaptation deficit, suggesting 
a new role for the cerebellum in sensorimotor adaptation tasks.

Copyright © 2017 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00451.2017
PMCID: PMC5596119
PMID: 28637818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Neuropsychol Rehabil. 2020 May;30(4):613-640. doi: 
10.1080/09602011.2018.1484374. Epub 2018 Jun 18.

A comparison of prism adaptation with terminal versus concurrent exposure on 
sensorimotor changes and spatial neglect.

Facchin A(1)(2)(3)(4), Bultitude JH(5), Mornati G(6), Peverelli M(7), Daini 
R(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Milano-Bicocca, Milano, Italy.
(2)Milan Centre for Neuroscience, Milano, Italy.
(3)Centre of Research in Optics and Optometry, University of Milano-Bicocca 
(COMiB), Milano, Italy.
(4)Institute of Research and Studies in Optics and Optometry, Vinci, Italy.
(5)Department of Psychology, University of Bath, Bath, UK.
(6)Scientific Institute IRCCS Eugenio Medea, Bosisio Parini, Lecco, Italy.
(7)Valduce Hospital Rehabilitation Center Villa Beretta, Costamasnaga, Italy.

Prism adaptation (PA) is a technique that induces a temporary change of the 
alignment between different reference frames. This technique has been shown to 
reduce many signs of unilateral spatial neglect (USN). Two procedures of prism 
adaptation have been used. In concurrent exposure participants can see their arm 
and hand during the movement trajectory, and during terminal exposure, 
participants can see only the most distal few centimetres. Because the two 
exposures elicit different proportions of visual and proprioceptive realignment, 
they could present different rehabilitation efficacies. We compared these 
procedures in 12 USN patients and 12 healthy participants who performed one 
session of PA with concurrent exposure and one session with terminal exposure. 
We compared the effects of the two exposure types on sensorimotor outcomes 
(visual subjective straight ahead, proprioceptive subjective straight ahead, 
open loop pointing, and error correction during exposure) and neglect outcomes. 
We found no significant differences in the effects of the two exposure types on 
sensorimotor performance of patients and controls, nor on patients' 
neuropsychological outcomes. Compared with controls, USN patients showed a 
significant rightward bias in visual subjective straight ahead pre-adaptation, a 
slower rate of error correction during prism exposure, and some evidence that 
visual and proprioceptive shift could be influenced by their neglect. Based on 
these results, we recommend that prism adaptation be conducted with concurrent 
exposure for easiness of execution.

DOI: 10.1080/09602011.2018.1484374
PMID: 29914300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Exp Brain Res. 2021 Jan;239(1):31-46. doi: 10.1007/s00221-020-05945-1. Epub 2020 
Oct 23.

Opposing force fields induce direction-specific sensorimotor adaptation but a 
non-specific perceptual shift consistent with a contraction of peripersonal 
space representation.

Leclere NX(1), Sarlegna FR(1), Coello Y(2), Bourdin C(3).

Author information:
(1)Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, ISM, Marseille, France.
(2)Univ. Lille, CNRS, UMR 9193 - SCALab - Sciences Cognitives et Sciences 
Affectives, 59000, Lille, France.
(3)Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, ISM, Marseille, France. 
christophe.bourdin@univ-amu.fr.

Most of our daily interactions with objects occur in the space immediately 
surrounding the body, i.e. the peripersonal space. The peripersonal space is 
characterized by multisensory processing of objects which are coded in terms of 
potential actions, specifying for instance whether objects are within reach or 
not. Our recent work suggested a link between exposure to a new force field, 
which changed the effector dynamics, and the representation of peripersonal 
space. To better understand the interplay between the plasticity of the motor 
system and peripersonal space representation, the present study examined whether 
changing the direction of the force field specifically modified the perception 
of action boundaries. Participants seated at the centre of an experimental 
platform estimated visual targets' reachability before and after adapting 
upper-limb reaching movements to the Coriolis force generated by either 
clockwise or counter clockwise rotation of the platform (120°/s). Opposite 
spatial after-effects were observed, showing that force-field adaptation depends 
on the direction of the rotation. In contrast, perceived action boundaries 
shifted leftward following exposure to the new force field, regardless of the 
direction of the rotation. Overall, these findings support the idea that abrupt 
exposure to a new force field results in a direction-specific updating of the 
central sensorimotor representations underlying the control of arm movements. 
Abrupt exposure to a new force field also results in a nonspecific shift in the 
perception of action boundaries, which is consistent with a contraction of the 
peripersonal space. Such effect, which does not appear to be related to state 
anxiety, could be related to the protective role of the peripersonal space in 
response to the uncertainty of the sensorimotor system induced by the abrupt 
modification of the environment.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-020-05945-1
PMID: 33097985


62. Neuroimage. 2017 Dec;163:93-105. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.09.026. Epub 
2017 Sep 15.

Neural oscillations reflect latent learning states underlying dual-context 
sensorimotor adaptation.

Fine JM(1), Moore D(1), Santello M(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological and Health Systems Engineering, Arizona State 
University, Tempe, AZ 85287-9709, United States.
(2)School of Biological and Health Systems Engineering, Arizona State 
University, Tempe, AZ 85287-9709, United States. Electronic address: 
marco.santello@asu.edu.

Recent studies have suggested that individuals can form multiple motor memories 
when simultaneously adapting to multiple, but oppositely-oriented perturbations. 
These findings predict that individuals detect the change in learning context, 
allowing the selective initialization and update of motor memories. However, 
previous electrophysiological studies of sensorimotor adaptation have not 
identified a neural mechanism supporting the detection of a context switch and 
adaptation to separate contexts. Here, we tested the hypothesis that such a 
mechanism is identifiable through neural oscillations measured through EEG. 
Human participants learned to manipulate an object in two opposite contexts 
(mass distribution). This task was designed based on previous work showing that 
people can adapt to both contexts. We found that sensorimotor α and β, and 
medial frontal θ frequency bands all exhibited different response patterns with 
respect to the error in each context. To determine whether any frequency's 
responses to error were distinctly related to a switch in context, we predicted 
single-trial EEG data from a computational learning model that can adapt to 
multiple contexts simultaneously based on a switching mechanism. This analysis 
revealed that only medial frontal θ was predicted by a component of the model 
state that adapts to errors based on a context switch. In contrast, α and β were 
predicted by a model state that was updated from performance errors independent 
of the context. These findings provide novel evidence showing that sensorimotor 
and medial frontal oscillations are predicted by different adaptation processes, 
and that changes in medial frontal activity may indicate the formation of motor 
memories by responding to changes in learning context.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.09.026
PMID: 28919408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Vestib Res. 2002-2003;12(5-6):291-9.

Sensorimotor aspects of high-speed artificial gravity: III. Sensorimotor 
adaptation.

DiZio P(1), Lackner JR.

Collaborators: Young LR(2), Lackner JR(3).

Author information:
(1)Ashton Graybiel Spatial Orientation Laboratory, Brandeis University, MS033, 
Waltham, MA 02454, USA. dizio@brandeis.edu
(2)MIT, Cambridge
(3)Brandeis U, Waltham, MA

As a countermeasure to the debilitating physiological effects of weightlessness, 
astronauts could live continuously in an artificial gravity environment created 
by slow rotation of an entire spacecraft or be exposed to brief daily "doses" in 
a short radius centrifuge housed within a non-rotating spacecraft. A potential 
drawback to both approaches is that head movements made during rotation may be 
disorienting and nauseogenic. These side effects are more severe at higher 
rotation rates, especially upon first exposure. Head movements during rotation 
generate aberrant vestibular stimulation and Coriolis force perturbations of the 
head-neck motor system. This article reviews our progress toward distinguishing 
vestibular and motor factors in side effects of rotation, and presents new data 
concerning the rates of rotation up to which adaptation is possible. We have 
studied subjects pointing to targets during constant velocity rotation, because 
these movements generate Coriolis motor perturbations of the arm but do not 
involve unusual vestibular stimulation. Initially, reaching paths and endpoints 
are deviated in the direction of the transient lateral Coriolis forces 
generated. With practice, subjects soon move in straighter paths and land on 
target once more. If sight of the arm is permitted, adaptation is more rapid 
than in darkness. Initial arm movement trajectory and endpoint deviations are 
proportional to Coriolis force magnitude over a range of rotation speeds from 5 
to 20 rpm, and there is rapid, complete motor adaptation at all speeds. These 
new results indicate that motor adaptation to high rotation rates is possible. 
Coriolis force perturbations of head movements also occur in a rotating 
environment but adaptation gradually develops over the course of many head 
movements.

PMID: 14501105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2017 Apr;267(3):237-244. doi: 
10.1007/s00406-016-0716-3. Epub 2016 Jul 21.

Instability of visual error processing for sensorimotor adaptation in 
schizophrenia.

Lencer R(1)(2), Meermeier A(3)(4), Silling K(5), Gremmler S(3), Lappe M(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Muenster, 
Albert-Schweitzer-Campus 1, Geb. A9, 48149, Muenster, Germany. 
rebekka.lencer@ukmuenster.de.
(2)Otto-Creutzfeldt Center for Cognitive and Behavioural Neuroscience, 
University of Muenster, Muenster, Germany. rebekka.lencer@ukmuenster.de.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Muenster, Muenster, Germany.
(4)Otto-Creutzfeldt Center for Cognitive and Behavioural Neuroscience, 
University of Muenster, Muenster, Germany.
(5)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Muenster, 
Albert-Schweitzer-Campus 1, Geb. A9, 48149, Muenster, Germany.

Saccadic adaptation can be used to study disturbances of sensory processing and 
motor learning. We investigated whether patients with schizophrenia can adjust 
saccadic amplitudes to account for an increase in visual error while the saccade 
is in flight, and whether they transfer this change to a visuo-manual 
localization task. Fourteen patients (mean 37.1 years) and 14 healthy controls 
(mean 35.1 years) performed 200 adaptation trials of 10° with target shifts of 
4° in the outward direction. We determined the percent amplitude change during 
adaptation and adaptation speed. In addition, subjects localized a stimulus that 
was flashed 50 ms after saccade target onset to measure the transfer of change 
in visual space perception to visuo-manual coordination. Eye movements were 
recorded at 1000 Hz. Saccade amplitudes increased over adaptation trials by 11 % 
(p < 0.001) similarly in both groups. Amplitude variability during adaptation 
was higher in patients (1.06° ± 0.32°) than in controls (0.71° ± 0.14°; 
p = 0.001), while adaptation speed was slower in patients (0.02 ± 0.03) than in 
controls (0.11 ± 0.11; p = 0.01). Other pre- and post-adaptation saccade metrics 
did not differ between groups. The adaptation process shifted localization of 
the flashed target in the adaptation direction similarly in both groups. The use 
of error signals for the internal recalibration of sensorimotor systems and the 
transfer of this recalibration to visual space perception appear basically 
unimpaired in schizophrenia. Higher amplitude variability in patients suggests a 
certain instability of saccadic control in cerebellar systems. Patients seem to 
rely on visual error processing in frontal circuitry, resulting in slower 
adaptation speeds, despite unimpaired adaptation strength.

DOI: 10.1007/s00406-016-0716-3
PMID: 27443319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Clin Neurophysiol. 2014 Sep;125(9):1926-7. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2014.01.017. 
Epub 2014 Feb 3.

Neurorehabilitation: From sensorimotor adaptation to motor learning, or the 
opposite?

Bonnetblanc F(1).

Author information:
(1)INRIA, University of Montpellier 2, LIRMM, équipe DEMAR, Montpellier 34095, 
France; Cognition, Action et Plasticité Sensorimotrice, INSERM U-1093, 
Université de Bourgogne, UFR STAPS, Dijon 27877, France; Institut Universitaire 
de France, France. Electronic address: francois.bonnetblanc@u-bourgogne.fr.

Comment on
    Clin Neurophysiol. 2014 May;125(5):869-71.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinph.2014.01.017
PMID: 24555923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Speech Lang Hear Res. 2002 Apr;45(2):295-310. doi: 
10.1044/1092-4388(2002/023).

Sensorimotor adaptation of speech I: Compensation and adaptation.

Houde JF(1), Jordan MI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, USA. houde@phy.ucsf.edu

When motor actions (e.g., reaching with your hand) adapt to altered sensory 
feedback (e.g., viewing a shifted image of your hand through a prism), the 
phenomenon is called sensorimotor adaptation (SA). In the study reported here, 
SA was observed in speech. In two 2-hour experiments (adaptation and control), 
participants whispered a variety of CVC words. For those words containing the 
vowel /E/, participants heard auditory feedback of their whispering. A DSP-based 
vocoder processed the participants' auditory feedback in real time, allowing the 
formant frequencies of participants' auditory speech feedback to be shifted. In 
the adaptation experiment, formants were shifted along one edge of the vowel 
triangle. For half the participants, formants were shifted so participants heard 
/a/ when they produced /E/; for the other half, the shift made participants hear 
/i/ when they produced /E/. During the adaptation experiment, participants 
altered their production of /E/ to compensate for the altered feedback, and 
these production changes were retained when participants whispered with auditory 
feedback blocked by masking noise. In a control experiment, in which the 
formants were not shifted, participants' production changes were small and 
inconsistent. Participants exhibited a range of adaptations in response to the 
altered feedback, with some participants adapting almost completely, and other 
participants showing very little or no adaptation.

DOI: 10.1044/1092-4388(2002/023)
PMID: 12003512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Atten Percept Psychophys. 2015 Feb;77(2):626-37. doi: 10.3758/s13414-014-0772-6.

Sensorimotor adaptation modifies action effects on sensory binding.

Corveleyn X(1), López-Moliner J, Coello Y.

Author information:
(1)Research Unit on Cognitive and Affective Sciences (URECA), Université Lille 
de France UDL3, Villeneuve d'Ascq, France.

Previous studies have shown that performing a motor action toward a target 
decreases the perceptual asynchrony observed in a temporal order judgment (TOJ) 
of a change in the target's visual attributes. We examined the temporal limit of 
this effect and whether this temporal limit can be extended through sensorimotor 
adaptation. Participants performed a TOJ task related to changes of the position 
and color of a visual stimulus in a perceptual and a motor task. A fixed change 
(color or position) occurred 250 or 500 ms following an auditory cue (perceptual 
task) or the end of a manual reaching action (motor task), whereas the variable 
change (position or color) occurred randomly within a time window of ±200 ms 
locked to the fixed change. The points of subjective simultaneity (PSSs) 
revealed that performing a voluntary action decreased the temporal asynchrony 
observed in the perceptual task, but only in the 250-ms delay condition. In 
Experiment 2, the fixed change occurred 1 s after either an auditory cue or the 
end of a manual reaching action, and the variable change occurred either 
simultaneously (new sensorimotor contingencies, 60 % of trials) or within a time 
window of ±200 ms (40 % of trials). The PSSs revealed that temporal asynchrony 
decreased in the motor task, but only after adaptation to the 1-s delay. Taken 
together, these data show that voluntary motor action affects the temporal 
binding of visual attributes for a period of less than 500 ms after the end of 
the action. Sensorimotor adaptation can nevertheless extend this time interval, 
at least up to 1 s.

DOI: 10.3758/s13414-014-0772-6
PMID: 25280521 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Exp Brain Res. 2010 Jun;203(4):737-41. doi: 10.1007/s00221-010-2289-0. Epub 2010 
May 18.

Sensorimotor adaptation is influenced by background music.

Bock O(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Physiology and Anatomy, German Sport University, Am Sportpark 
Müngersdorf 6, 50933, Cologne, Germany. bock@dshs-koeln.de

It is well established that listening to music can modify subjects' cognitive 
performance. The present study evaluates whether this so-called Mozart Effect 
extends beyond cognitive tasks and includes sensorimotor adaptation. Three 
subject groups listened to musical pieces that in the author's judgment were 
serene, neutral, or sad, respectively. This judgment was confirmed by the 
subjects' introspective reports. While listening to music, subjects engaged in a 
pointing task that required them to adapt to rotated visual feedback. All three 
groups adapted successfully, but the speed and magnitude of adaptive improvement 
was more pronounced with serene music than with the other two music types. In 
contrast, aftereffects upon restoration of normal feedback were independent of 
music type. These findings support the existence of a "Mozart effect" for 
strategic movement control, but not for adaptive recalibration. Possibly, 
listening to music modifies neural activity in an intertwined 
cognitive-emotional network.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-010-2289-0
PMID: 20480363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Neurosci. 2015 Sep 16;35(37):12753-65. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1090-15.2015.

Distinct Modulations in Sensorimotor Postmovement and Foreperiod β-Band 
Activities Related to Error Salience Processing and Sensorimotor Adaptation.

Torrecillos F(1), Alayrangues J(1), Kilavik BE(1), Malfait N(2).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Neurosciences de la Timone, UMR7289, CNRS/Aix Marseille 
Université, 13005 Marseille, France.
(2)Institut de Neurosciences de la Timone, UMR7289, CNRS/Aix Marseille 
Université, 13005 Marseille, France nmalfait@gmail.com.

In a recent study, Tan et al. (2014a,b) showed that the increase in β-power 
typically observed after a movement above sensorimotor regions (β-rebound) is 
attenuated when movement-execution errors are induced by visual perturbations. 
Moreover, akin to sensorimotor adaptation, the effect depended on the context in 
which the errors are experienced. Thus the β-rebound attenuation might relate to 
neural processes involved in trial-to-trial adaptive mechanisms. In two EEG 
experiments with human participants, along with the β-rebound, we examine 
β-activity during the preparation of reaches immediately following perturbed 
movements. In the first experiment, we show that both foreperiod and 
postmovement β-activities are parametrically modulated by the sizes of kinematic 
errors produced by unpredictable mechanical perturbations (force field) 
independent of their on-line corrections. In the second experiment, we contrast 
two types of reach errors: movement-execution errors that trigger trial-to-trial 
adaptive mechanisms and goal errors that do not elicit sensorimotor adaptation. 
Movement-execution errors were induced by mechanical or visual perturbations, 
whereas goal errors were caused by unexpected displacements of the target at 
movement initiation. Interestingly, foreperiod and postmovement β-activities 
exhibit contrasting patterns, pointing to important functional differences of 
their underlying neuronal activity. While both types of reach errors attenuate 
the postmovement β-rebound, only the kinematic errors that trigger 
trial-to-trial motor-command updates influenced β-activity during the 
foreperiod. These findings suggest that the error-related modulation of the 
β-rebound may reflect salience processing, independent of sensorimotor 
adaptation. In contrast, modulations in the foreperiod β-power might relate to 
the motor-command adjustments activated after movement-execution errors are 
experienced.
SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: The functional significance of sensorimotor β-band 
(15-25 Hz) oscillations remains uncertain. Recently β-power was found to be 
reduced following erroneous movements. We extend and refine this novel finding 
in two crucial ways. First, by contrasting the EEG correlates of movement errors 
driving or not driving adaptation we dissociate error-salience processing from 
error-based adaptation. Second, in addition to β-activity in error trials, we 
examine β-power during the preparation of the subsequent movements. We find 
clearly distinct patterns of error-related modulations for β-activities 
preceding and succeeding movements, highlighting critical functional 
differences. Postmovement β-power may reflect error-salience processing 
independent of sensorimotor adaptation. In contrast, modulations in the 
foreperiod β-band power may directly relate to the motor-command adjustments 
activated after movement-execution errors are experienced.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/3512753-13$15.00/0.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1090-15.2015
PMCID: PMC6795206
PMID: 26377464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


70. eNeuro. 2019 May 1;6(2):ENEURO.0358-18.2019. doi: 10.1523/ENEURO.0358-18.2019. 
Print 2019 Mar/Apr.

Corrective Muscle Activity Reveals Subject-Specific Sensorimotor Recalibration.

Iturralde PA(1)(2), Torres-Oviedo G(3)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioengineering, Swanson School of Engineering, University of 
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260.
(2)Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition, University of Pittsburgh, 
Pittsburgh, PA 15260.
(3)Department of Bioengineering, Swanson School of Engineering, University of 
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260 gelsyto@pitt.edu.

Recent studies suggest that planned and corrective actions are recalibrated 
during some forms of motor adaptation. However, corrective (also known as 
reactive) movements in human locomotion are thought to simply reflect sudden 
environmental changes independently from sensorimotor recalibration. Thus, we 
asked whether corrective responses can indicate the motor system's adapted state 
following prolonged exposure to a novel walking situation inducing sensorimotor 
adaptation. We recorded electromyographic (EMG) signals bilaterally on 15 leg 
muscles before, during, and after split-belts walking (i.e., novel walking 
situation), in which the legs move at different speeds. We exploited the rapid 
temporal dynamics of corrective responses upon unexpected speed transitions to 
isolate them from the overall motor output. We found that corrective muscle 
activity was structurally different following short versus long exposures to 
split-belts walking. Only after a long exposure, removal of the novel 
environment elicited corrective muscle patterns that matched those expected in 
response to a perturbation opposite to the one originally experienced. This 
indicated that individuals who recalibrated their motor system adopted 
split-belts environment as their new "normal" and transitioning back to the 
original walking environment causes subjects to react as if it was novel to 
them. Interestingly, this learning declined with age, but steady state 
modulation of muscle activity during split-belts walking did not, suggesting 
potentially different neural mechanisms underlying these motor patterns. Taken 
together, our results show that corrective motor commands reflect the adapted 
state of the motor system, which is less flexible as we age.

Copyright © 2019 Iturralde and Torres-Oviedo.

DOI: 10.1523/ENEURO.0358-18.2019
PMCID: PMC6497908
PMID: 31043463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Eur J Neurosci. 2016 Nov;44(9):2708-2715. doi: 10.1111/ejn.13355. Epub 2016 Aug 
19.

Temporally stable adaptation is robust, incomplete and specific.

van der Kooij K(1), Overvliet KE(2)(3), Smeets JB(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Movement Sciences, Vrije Universiteit, van der 
Boechorststraat 9, 1081 BT, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. k.vander.kooij@vu.nl.
(2)Department of Human Movement Sciences, Vrije Universiteit, van der 
Boechorststraat 9, 1081 BT, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Biological Psychology and Neuropsychology, Universität Hamburg, 
Hamburg, Germany.

Sensorimotor adaptation, the process that reduces movement errors by learning 
from sensory feedback, is often studied within a session of about half an hour. 
Within such a single session, adaptation generally reaches plateau before errors 
are completely removed. However, adaptation may complete on longer timescales: 
the slow components of error-based adaptation are associated with good 
retention. In this study, we tested how adaptation evolves over time by asking 
participants to perform six adaptation sessions on different days. In these 
sessions, participants performed a three-dimensional reaching task while visual 
feedback about endpoint errors was rotated around the cyclopean eye. In 
addition, context specificity of the adaptation was addressed by measuring 
inter-limb transfer and transfer to visual and proprioceptive perceptual tasks. 
We show that from the second session on, the adaptation was retained almost 
completely across sessions. However, after six learning sessions, adaptation 
still reached plateau before errors were completely removed. The adaptation was 
specific: the adaptation did neither transfer to the other hand, nor to the 
visual, and only marginally to the proprioceptive perceptual estimates. We 
conclude that motor adaptation is robust, specific and incomplete.

© 2016 The Authors. European Journal of Neuroscience published by Federation of 
European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ejn.13355
PMCID: PMC5129530
PMID: 27469297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Exp Brain Res. 2008 Jan;184(3):451-6. doi: 10.1007/s00221-007-1213-8. Epub 2007 
Nov 21.

Simultaneous sensorimotor adaptation and sequence learning.

Overduin SA(1), Richardson AG, Bizzi E, Press DZ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences and McGovern Institute for Brain 
Research, MIT, 43 Vassar Street, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. overduin@mit.edu

Sensorimotor adaptation and sequence learning have often been treated as 
distinct forms of motor learning. But frequently the motor system must acquire 
both types of experience simultaneously. Here, we investigated the interaction 
of these two forms of motor learning by having subjects adapt to predictable 
forces imposed by a robotic manipulandum while simultaneously reaching to an 
implicit sequence of targets. We show that adaptation to novel dynamics and 
learning of a sequence of movements can occur simultaneously and without 
significant interference or facilitation. When both conditions were presented 
simultaneously to subjects, their trajectory error and reaction time decreased 
to the same extent as those of subjects who experienced the force field or 
sequence independently.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-007-1213-8
PMID: 18030451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Chin J Traumatol. 2018 Aug;21(4):246-248. doi: 10.1016/j.cjtee.2018.02.005. Epub 
2018 Jun 28.

Influence of sensorimotor adaptation and learning process for rehabilitation on 
the functional mobility of a patient with traumatic brain injury: A case report.

Kumar V(1), Goyal R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiotherapy, National Heart Institute, New Delhi, India.
(2)Department of Physiotherapy, National Heart Institute, New Delhi, India. 
Electronic address: ranigoyal09@gmail.com.

This case report reveals the implementation of sensorimotor adaptation and 
learning process for rehabilitation in a patient with traumatic brain injury to 
achieve optimum recovery which is permanent in nature in compliance to the 
disability rating scale. A twenty two year old gentleman who had a history of 
fall was diagnosed as having subarachnoid hemorrhage along with diffuse axonal 
injury of the brain and bilateral lung contusion with pneumothorax. He underwent 
a total of ten months of sensorimotor adaptation and learning process for 
rehabilitation, which achieved functional mobility with a walker.

Copyright © 2018 Daping Hospital and the Research Institute of Surgery of the 
Third Military Medical University. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cjtee.2018.02.005
PMCID: PMC6085230
PMID: 30017540 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Cortex. 2013 Sep;49(8):2249-59. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2012.11.008. Epub 2012 Nov 
27.

Prism adaptation by mental practice.

Michel C(1), Gaveau J, Pozzo T, Papaxanthis C.

Author information:
(1)Université de Bourgogne, Campus Universitaire, UFR STAPS, Dijon, France. 
Carine.Michel@u-bourgogne.fr

The prediction of our actions and their interaction with the external 
environment is critical for sensorimotor adaptation. For instance, during prism 
exposure, which deviates laterally our visual field, we progressively correct 
movement errors by combining sensory feedback with forward model sensory 
predictions. However, very often we project our actions to the external 
environment without physically interacting with it (e.g., mental actions). An 
intriguing question is whether adaptation will occur if we imagine, instead of 
executing, an arm movement while wearing prisms. Here, we investigated prism 
adaptation during mental actions. In the first experiment, participants (n = 54) 
performed arm pointing movements before and after exposure to the optical 
device. They were equally divided into six groups according to prism exposure: 
Prisms-Active, Prisms-Imagery, Prisms-Stationary, Prisms-Stationary-Attention, 
No Conflict-Prisms-Imagery, No Prisms-Imagery. Adaptation, measured by the 
difference in pointing errors between pre-test and post-test, occurred only in 
Prisms-Active and Prisms-Imagery conditions. The second experiment confirmed the 
results of the first experiment and further showed that sensorimotor adaptation 
was mainly due to proprioceptive realignment in both Prisms-Active (n = 10) and 
Prisms-Imagery (n = 10) groups. In both experiments adaptation was greater 
following actual than imagined pointing movements. The present results are the 
first demonstration of prism adaptation by mental practice under prism exposure 
and they are discussed in terms of internal forward models and sensorimotor 
plasticity.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cortex.2012.11.008
PMID: 23276397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Front Syst Neurosci. 2015 Apr 16;9:59. doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2015.00059. 
eCollection 2015.

Rapid adaptation of multisensory integration in vestibular pathways.

Carriot J(1), Jamali M(1), Cullen KE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, McGill University Montreal, QC, Canada.

Sensing gravity is vital for our perception of spatial orientation, the control 
of upright posture, and generation of our everyday activities. When an astronaut 
transitions to microgravity or returns to earth, the vestibular input arising 
from self-motion will not match the brain's expectation. Our recent 
neurophysiological studies have provided insight into how the nervous system 
rapidly reorganizes when vestibular input becomes unreliable by both (1) 
updating its internal model of the sensory consequences of motion and (2) 
up-weighting more reliable extra-vestibular information. These neural 
strategies, in turn, are linked to improvements in sensorimotor performance 
(e.g., gaze and postural stability, locomotion, orienting) and perception 
characterized by similar time courses. We suggest that furthering our 
understanding of the neural mechanisms that underlie sensorimotor adaptation 
will have important implications for optimizing training programs for astronauts 
before and after space exploration missions and for the design of goal-oriented 
rehabilitation for patients.

DOI: 10.3389/fnsys.2015.00059
PMCID: PMC4399207
PMID: 25932009


76. Curr Opin Physiol. 2019 Apr;8:177-187. doi: 10.1016/j.cophys.2019.03.005. Epub 
2019 Mar 22.

Gain control in the sensorimotor system.

Azim E(1), Seki K(2).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 
10010 N. Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
(2)Department of Neurophysiology, National Institute of Neuroscience, National 
Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Kodaira, Tokyo 187-8502, Japan.

Coordinated movement depends on constant interaction between neural circuits 
that produce motor output and those that report sensory consequences. 
Fundamental to this process are mechanisms for controlling the influence that 
sensory signals have on motor pathways - for example, reducing feedback gains 
when they are disruptive and increasing gains when advantageous. Sensory gain 
control comes in many forms and serves diverse purposes - in some cases sensory 
input is attenuated to maintain movement stability and filter out irrelevant or 
self-generated signals, or enhanced to facilitate salient signals for improved 
movement execution and adaptation. The ubiquitous presence of sensory gain 
control across species at multiple levels of the nervous system reflects the 
importance of tuning the impact that feedback information has on behavioral 
output.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cophys.2019.03.005
PMCID: PMC6688851
PMID: 31403088

Conflict of interest statement: We wish to confirm that there are no known 
conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no 
significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its 
outcome.


77. J Neurophysiol. 2013 Apr;109(8):2077-85. doi: 10.1152/jn.00719.2012. Epub 2013 
Jan 23.

Sensorimotor adaptation changes the neural coding of somatosensory stimuli.

Nasir SM(1), Darainy M, Ostry DJ.

Author information:
(1)Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois, USA.

Motor learning is reflected in changes to the brain's functional organization as 
a result of experience. We show here that these changes are not limited to motor 
areas of the brain and indeed that motor learning also changes sensory systems. 
We test for plasticity in sensory systems using somatosensory evoked potentials 
(SEPs). A robotic device is used to elicit somatosensory inputs by displacing 
the arm in the direction of applied force during learning. We observe that 
following learning there are short latency changes to the response in 
somatosensory areas of the brain that are reliably correlated with the magnitude 
of motor learning: subjects who learn more show greater changes in SEP 
magnitude. The effects we observe are tied to motor learning. When the limb is 
displaced passively, such that subjects experience similar movements but without 
experiencing learning, no changes in the evoked response are observed. 
Sensorimotor adaptation thus alters the neural coding of somatosensory stimuli.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00719.2012
PMCID: PMC3628028
PMID: 23343897 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Exp Brain Res. 2008 Feb;185(2):227-36. doi: 10.1007/s00221-007-1147-1. Epub 2007 
Oct 24.

Sensorimotor adaptation in Parkinson's disease: evidence for a dopamine 
dependent remapping disturbance.

Paquet F(1), Bedard MA, Levesque M, Tremblay PL, Lemay M, Blanchet PJ, Scherzer 
P, Chouinard S, Filion J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Neuropsychology Division, University of Quebec in 
Montreal (UQAM), Station Downtown, PO Box 8888, Montreal, QC, Canada.

Sensorimotor adaptation is thought to involve a remapping of the kinematic and 
kinetic parameters associated with movements performed within a changing 
environment. Patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) are known to be affected on 
this type of learning process, although the specific role of dopamine depletion 
in these deficits has not yet been elucidated. The present study was an attempt 
to clarify whether dopamine depletion in PD may directly affect the capacity to 
internally reorganize the visuomotor remapping of a distorted environment. 
Fourteen PD patients were tested twice, while they were treated and while they 
were withdrawn from their regular levodopa treatment. Fourteen control subjects 
were also enrolled and tested twice. Two parallel forms of the Computed Mirror 
Pointing Task (CMPT), requiring making a reaching movement in a visually 
transformed environment (mirror inversion), were administered to each 
participant. Each of them had to perform 40 trials at each of the 2 testing 
sessions. At each trial, sensorimotor adaptation was evaluated by the initial 
direction angle (IDA), which reflects the direction of movement before any 
visually guided readjustment. Results revealed no IDA difference at baseline, 
between control subject and PD patients, whether they were treated or not. In 
all group, IDA values at that time were large, reflecting a tendency to make 
movements according to the real life visuomotor mapping (based on the natural 
direct vision). However, striking differences appeared during sensorimotor 
learning, in that IDA reduction along trials was poorer in patient not treated 
with levodopa than both control subjects and the same PD patient treated with 
levodopa. No difference was observed between the treated PD patients and control 
subjects. Given that IDA is thought to reflect the internal representation of 
the visuomotor mapping, it is concluded that dopamine depletion in PD would 
affects sensorimotor adaptation, in that it facilitates old and poorly adapted 
movements (real life mapping), instead of new and more adapted ones (mirror 
transformed mapping).

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-007-1147-1
PMID: 17957363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Vestib Res. 2012 Jan 1;22(2):139-44. doi: 10.3233/VES-2011-0434.

Pre-flight sensorimotor adaptation protocols for suborbital flight.

Shelhamer M(1), Beaton K.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, and Biomedical 
Engineering, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 
21287-6921, USA. mjs@dizzy.med.jhu.edu

Commercial suborbital flights, which include 3-5 minutes of 0 g between hyper-g 
launch and landing phases, will present suborbital passengers with a challenging 
sensorimotor experience. Based on the results of neurovestibular research in 
parabolic and orbital flight, and the anticipated wide range of fitness and 
experience levels of suborbital passengers, neurovestibular disturbances are 
likely to be problematic in this environment. Pre-flight adaptation protocols 
might alleviate some of these issues. Therefore, we describe a set of 
sensorimotor tests to evaluate passengers before suborbital flight, including 
assessment of the angular vestibulo-ocular reflex (VOR), ocular skew and 
disconjugate torsion, subjective visual vertical, and roll vection. Performance 
on these tests can be examined for correlations with in-flight experience, such 
as motion sickness, disorientation, and visual disturbances, based on 
questionnaires and cabin video recordings. Through an understanding of 
sensorimotor adaptation to parabolic and orbital flight, obtained from many 
previous studies, we can then suggest appropriate pre-flight adaptation 
procedures.

DOI: 10.3233/VES-2011-0434
PMID: 23000613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Neurophysiol. 2013 Nov;110(9):2152-62. doi: 10.1152/jn.00439.2013. Epub 2013 
Aug 21.

Perceptual learning in sensorimotor adaptation.

Darainy M(1), Vahdat S, Ostry DJ.

Author information:
(1)McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; and.

Motor learning often involves situations in which the somatosensory targets of 
movement are, at least initially, poorly defined, as for example, in learning to 
speak or learning the feel of a proper tennis serve. Under these conditions, 
motor skill acquisition presumably requires perceptual as well as motor 
learning. That is, it engages both the progressive shaping of sensory targets 
and associated changes in motor performance. In the present study, we test the 
idea that perceptual learning alters somatosensory function and in so doing 
produces changes to human motor performance and sensorimotor adaptation. 
Subjects in these experiments undergo perceptual training in which a robotic 
device passively moves the subject's arm on one of a set of fan-shaped 
trajectories. Subjects are required to indicate whether the robot moved the limb 
to the right or the left and feedback is provided. Over the course of training 
both the perceptual boundary and acuity are altered. The perceptual learning is 
observed to improve both the rate and extent of learning in a subsequent 
sensorimotor adaptation task and the benefits persist for at least 24 h. The 
improvement in the present studies varies systematically with changes in 
perceptual acuity and is obtained regardless of whether the perceptual boundary 
shift serves to systematically increase or decrease error on subsequent 
movements. The beneficial effects of perceptual training are found to be 
substantially dependent on reinforced decision-making in the sensory domain. 
Passive-movement training on its own is less able to alter subsequent learning 
in the motor system. Overall, this study suggests perceptual learning plays an 
integral role in motor learning.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00439.2013
PMCID: PMC4073967
PMID: 23966671 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Cereb Cortex. 2017 Mar 1;27(3):1748-1757. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhv289.

Functional Evidence for Memory Stabilization in Sensorimotor Adaptation: A 24-h 
Resting-State fMRI Study.

Della-Maggiore V(1), Villalta JI(1), Kovacevic N(2), McIntosh AR(2).

Author information:
(1)IFIBIO Houssay, Systems Neuroscience Group, Department of Physiology and 
Biophysics, School of Medicine, University of Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.
(2)Rotman Research Institute at Baycrest Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Canada.

Adaptation learning is crucial to maintain precise motor control in face of 
environmental perturbations. Although much progress has been made in 
understanding the psychophysics and neurophysiology of sensorimotor adaptation 
(SA), the time course of memory consolidation remains elusive. The lack of a 
reproducible gradient of memory resistance using protocols of retrograde 
interference has even led to the proposal that memories produced through SA do 
not consolidate. Here, we pursued an alternative approach using resting-state 
fMRI to track changes in functional connectivity (FC) induced by learning. Given 
that consolidation leads to long-term memory, we hypothesized that a change in 
FC that predicted long-term memory but not short-term memory would provide 
indirect evidence for memory stabilization. Six scans were acquired before, 15 
min, 1, 3, 5.5, and 24 h after training on a center-out task under veridical or 
distorted visual feedback. The experimental group showed an increment in FC of a 
network including motor, premotor, posterior parietal cortex, cerebellum, and 
putamen that peaked at 5.5 h. Crucially, the strengthening of this network 
correlated positively with long-term retention but negatively with short-term 
retention. Our work provides evidence, suggesting that adaptation memories 
stabilize within a 6-h window, and points to different mechanisms subserving 
short- and long-term memory.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bhv289
PMID: 26656723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Physiol Behav. 2009 Jan 8;96(1):115-21. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2008.09.002. Epub 
2008 Sep 9.

Improved sensorimotor adaptation after exhaustive exercise is accompanied by 
altered brain activity.

Mierau A(1), Schneider S, Abel T, Askew C, Werner S, Strüder HK.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Motor Control and Movement Technique, German Sport University, 
Cologne, Germany. mierau@dshs-koeln.de

Acute exercise has been shown to exhibit different effects on human sensorimotor 
behavior; however, the causes and mechanisms of the responses are often not 
clear. The primary aim of the present study was to determine the effects of 
incremental running until exhaustion on sensorimotor performance and adaptation 
in a tracking task. Subjects were randomly assigned to a running group (RG), a 
tracking group (TG), or a running followed by tracking group (RTG), with 10 
subjects assigned to each group. Treadmill running velocity was initially set at 
2.0 m s(-1), increasing by 0.5 m s(-1) every 5 min until exhaustion. Tracking 
consisted of 35 episodes (each 40 s) where the subjects' task was to track a 
visual target on a computer screen while the visual feedback was veridical 
(performance) or left-right reversed (adaptation). Resting 
electroencephalographic (EEG) activity was recorded before and after each 
experimental condition (running, tracking, rest). Tracking performance and the 
final amount of adaptation did not differ between groups. However, task 
adaptation was significantly faster in RTG compared to TG. In addition, 
increased alpha and beta power were observed following tracking in TG but not 
RTG although exhaustive running failed to induce significant changes in these 
frequency bands. Our results suggest that exhaustive running can facilitate 
adaptation processes in a manual tracking task. Attenuated cortical activation 
following tracking in the exercise condition was interpreted to indicate 
cortical efficiency and exercise-induced facilitation of selective central 
processes during actual task demands.

DOI: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2008.09.002
PMID: 18822308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2015 Jun;56(6):3699-708. doi: 10.1167/iovs.15-16605.

Adaptation to Laterally Displacing Prisms in Anisometropic Amblyopia.

Sklar JC(1), Goltz HC(2), Gane L(1), Wong AM(3).

Author information:
(1)Neurosciences and Mental Health The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, 
Canada.
(2)Neurosciences and Mental Health The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, 
Canada 2Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Sciences, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Canada.
(3)Neurosciences and Mental Health The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, 
Canada 2Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Sciences, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Canada 3Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Sciences, The Hospital 
for Sick Children, Toro.

PURPOSE: Using visual feedback to modify sensorimotor output in response to 
changes in the external environment is essential for daily function. Prism 
adaptation is a well-established experimental paradigm to quantify sensorimotor 
adaptation; that is, how the sensorimotor system adapts to an optically-altered 
visuospatial environment. Amblyopia is a neurodevelopmental disorder 
characterized by spatiotemporal deficits in vision that impacts manual and 
oculomotor function. This study explored the effects of anisometropic amblyopia 
on prism adaptation.
METHODS: Eight participants with anisometropic amblyopia and 11 visually-normal 
adults, all right-handed, were tested. Participants pointed to visual targets 
and were presented with feedback of hand position near the terminus of limb 
movement in three blocks: baseline, adaptation, and deadaptation. Adaptation was 
induced by viewing with binocular 11.4° (20 prism diopter [PD]) left-shifting 
prisms. All tasks were performed during binocular viewing.
RESULTS: Participants with anisometropic amblyopia required significantly more 
trials (i.e., increased time constant) to adapt to prismatic optical 
displacement than visually-normal controls. During the rapid error correction 
phase of adaptation, people with anisometropic amblyopia also exhibited greater 
variance in motor output than visually-normal controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Amblyopia impacts on the ability to adapt the sensorimotor system 
to an optically-displaced visual environment. The increased time constant and 
greater variance in motor output during the rapid error correction phase of 
adaptation may indicate deficits in processing of visual information as a result 
of degraded spatiotemporal vision in amblyopia.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.15-16605
PMID: 26047171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Neurophysiol. 2018 Apr 1;119(4):1367-1393. doi: 10.1152/jn.00197.2017. Epub 
2017 Nov 29.

Estimating properties of the fast and slow adaptive processes during 
sensorimotor adaptation.

Albert ST(1), Shadmehr R(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Computational Motor Control, Department of Biomedical 
Engineering, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine , Baltimore, Maryland.

Experience of a prediction error recruits multiple motor learning processes, 
some that learn strongly from error but have weak retention and some that learn 
weakly from error but exhibit strong retention. These processes are not 
generally observable but are inferred from their collective influence on 
behavior. Is there a robust way to uncover the hidden processes? A standard 
approach is to consider a state space model where the hidden states change 
following experience of error and then fit the model to the measured data by 
minimizing the squared error between measurement and model prediction. We found 
that this least-squares algorithm (LMSE) often yielded unrealistic predictions 
about the hidden states, possibly because of its neglect of the stochastic 
nature of error-based learning. We found that behavioral data during adaptation 
was better explained by a system in which both error-based learning and movement 
production were stochastic processes. To uncover the hidden states of learning, 
we developed a generalized expectation maximization (EM) algorithm. In 
simulation, we found that although LMSE tracked the measured data marginally 
better than EM, EM was far more accurate in unmasking the time courses and 
properties of the hidden states of learning. In a power analysis designed to 
measure the effect of an intervention on sensorimotor learning, EM significantly 
reduced the number of subjects that were required for effective hypothesis 
testing. In summary, we developed a new approach for analysis of data in 
sensorimotor experiments. The new algorithm improved the ability to uncover the 
multiple processes that contribute to learning from error. NEW & NOTEWORTHY 
Motor learning is supported by multiple adaptive processes, each with distinct 
error sensitivity and forgetting rates. We developed a generalized expectation 
maximization algorithm that uncovers these hidden processes in the context of 
modern sensorimotor learning experiments that include error-clamp trials and set 
breaks. The resulting toolbox may improve the ability to identify the properties 
of these hidden processes and reduce the number of subjects needed to test the 
effectiveness of interventions on sensorimotor learning.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00197.2017
PMCID: PMC5966728
PMID: 29187548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Neurophysiol. 2011 Aug;106(2):620-9. doi: 10.1152/jn.00081.2011. Epub 2011 May 
11.

Sensorimotor adaptation of point-to-point arm movements after spaceflight: the 
role of internal representation of gravity force in trajectory planning.

Gaveau J(1), Paizis C, Berret B, Pozzo T, Papaxanthis C.

Author information:
(1)UFR STAPS, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France.

After an exposure to weightlessness, the central nervous system operates under 
new dynamic and sensory contexts. To find optimal solutions for rapid 
adaptation, cosmonauts have to decide whether parameters from the world or their 
body have changed and to estimate their properties. Here, we investigated 
sensorimotor adaptation after a spaceflight of 10 days. Five cosmonauts 
performed forward point-to-point arm movements in the sagittal plane 40 days 
before and 24 and 72 h after the spaceflight. We found that, whereas the shape 
of hand velocity profiles remained unaffected after the spaceflight, hand path 
curvature significantly increased 1 day after landing and returned to the 
preflight level on the third day. Control experiments, carried out by 10 
subjects under normal gravity conditions, showed that loading the arm with 
varying loads (from 0.3 to 1.350 kg) did not affect path curvature. Therefore, 
changes in path curvature after spaceflight cannot be the outcome of a control 
process based on the subjective feeling that arm inertia was increased. By 
performing optimal control simulations, we found that arm kinematics after 
exposure to microgravity corresponded to a planning process that overestimated 
the gravity level and optimized movements in a hypergravity environment (∼1.4 
g). With time and practice, the sensorimotor system was recalibrated to Earth's 
gravity conditions, and cosmonauts progressively generated accurate estimations 
of the body state, gravity level, and sensory consequences of the motor commands 
(72 h). These observations provide novel insights into how the central nervous 
system evaluates body (inertia) and environmental (gravity) states during 
sensorimotor adaptation of point-to-point arm movements after an exposure to 
weightlessness.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00081.2011
PMID: 21562193 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Psychon Bull Rev. 2020 Jun;27(3):544-552. doi: 10.3758/s13423-020-01725-8.

The perils of learning to move while speaking: One-sided interference between 
speech and visuomotor adaptation.

Lametti DR(1)(2), Quek MYM(3), Prescott CB(3), Brittain JS(4), Watkins KE(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Acadia University, Wolfville, Nova Scotia, Canada. 
danielrlametti@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. 
danielrlametti@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(4)School of Psychology, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.

Our understanding of the adaptive processes that shape sensorimotor behavior is 
largely derived from studying isolated movements. Studies of visuomotor 
adaptation, in which participants adapt cursor movements to rotations of the 
cursor's screen position, have led to prominent theories of motor control. In 
response to changes in visual feedback of movements, explicit (cognitive) and 
implicit (automatic) learning processes adapt movements to counter errors. 
However, movements rarely occur in isolation. The extent to which explicit and 
implicit processes drive sensorimotor adaptation when multiple movements occur 
simultaneously, as in the real world, remains unclear. Here we address this 
problem in the context of speech and hand movements. Participants spoke in-time 
with rapid, hand-driven cursor movements. Using real-time alterations of vowel 
sound feedback, and visual rotations of the cursor's screen position, we induced 
sensorimotor adaptation in one or both movements simultaneously. Across three 
experiments (n = 60, n = 48 and n = 76, respectively), we demonstrate that 
visuomotor adaptation is markedly impaired by simultaneous speech adaptation, 
and the impairment is specific to the explicit learning process in visuomotor 
adaptation. In contrast, visuomotor adaptation had no impact on speech 
adaptation. The results demonstrate that the explicit learning process in 
visuomotor adaptation is sensitive to movements in other motor domains. They 
suggest that some forms of speech adaptation may lack an explicit learning 
process altogether.

DOI: 10.3758/s13423-020-01725-8
PMID: 32212105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Neurophysiol. 2016 Mar;115(3):1499-511. doi: 10.1152/jn.00066.2015. Epub 2016 
Jan 20.

Delayed feedback during sensorimotor learning selectively disrupts adaptation 
but not strategy use.

Brudner SN(1), Kethidi N(2), Graeupner D(3), Ivry RB(4), Taylor JA(5).

Author information:
(1)Duke Institute for Brain Sciences, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina;
(2)Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey;
(3)Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey; 
Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey;
(4)Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, California; and 
Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley, 
California.
(5)Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey; 
Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey; 
jordanat@princeton.edu.

In sensorimotor adaptation tasks, feedback delays can cause significant 
reductions in the rate of learning. This constraint is puzzling given that many 
skilled behaviors have inherently long delays (e.g., hitting a golf ball). One 
difference in these task domains is that adaptation is primarily driven by 
error-based feedback, whereas skilled performance may also rely to a large 
extent on outcome-based feedback. This difference suggests that error- and 
outcome-based feedback may engage different learning processes, and these 
processes may be associated with different temporal constraints. We tested this 
hypothesis in a visuomotor adaptation task. Error feedback was indicated by the 
terminal position of a cursor, while outcome feedback was indicated by points. 
In separate groups of participants, the two feedback signals were presented 
immediately at the end of the movement, after a delay, or with just the error 
feedback delayed. Participants learned to counter the rotation in a similar 
manner regardless of feedback delay. However, the aftereffect, an indicator of 
implicit motor adaptation, was attenuated with delayed error feedback, 
consistent with the hypothesis that a different learning process supports 
performance under delay. We tested this by employing a task that dissociates the 
contribution of explicit strategies and implicit adaptation. We find that 
explicit aiming strategies contribute to the majority of the learning curve, 
regardless of delay; however, implicit learning, measured over the course of 
learning and by aftereffects, was significantly attenuated with delayed 
error-based feedback. These experiments offer new insight into the temporal 
constraints associated with different motor learning processes.

Copyright © 2016 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00066.2015
PMCID: PMC4808111
PMID: 26792878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Curr Biol. 2018 Oct 8;28(19):3106-3113.e2. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2018.07.030. Epub 
2018 Sep 20.

Robust Sensorimotor Learning during Variable Sentence-Level Speech.

Lametti DR(1), Smith HJ(2), Watkins KE(2), Shiller DM(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK; 
Department of Psychology, Acadia University, Wolfville, Nova Scotia, Canada. 
Electronic address: danielrlametti@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(3)École d'orthophonie et d'audiologie, Université de Montréal, Montreal, 
Canada; Sainte-Justine Hospital Research Center, Montreal, Canada; Centre for 
Research on Brain, Language & Music, Montreal, Canada. Electronic address: 
douglas.shiller@umontreal.ca.

Sensorimotor learning has been studied by altering the sound of the voice in 
real time as speech is produced. In response to voice alterations, learned 
changes in production reduce the perceived auditory error and persist for some 
time after the alteration is removed [1-5]. The results of such experiments have 
led to the development of prominent models of speech production. This work 
proposes that the control of speech relies on forward models to predict sensory 
outcomes of movements, and errors in these predictions drive sensorimotor 
learning [5-7]. However, sensorimotor learning in speech has only been observed 
following intensive training on a handful of discrete words or perceptually 
similar sentences. Stereotyped production does not capture the complex 
sensorimotor demands of fluid, real-world speech [8-11]. It remains unknown 
whether talkers predict the sensory consequences of variable sentence production 
to allow rapid and precise updating of speech motor plans when sensory 
prediction errors are encountered. Here, we used real-time alterations of speech 
feedback to test for sensorimotor learning during the production of 50 sentences 
that varied markedly in length, vocabulary, and grammar. Following baseline 
production, all vowels were simultaneously altered and played back through 
headphones in near real time. Robust feedforward changes in sentence production 
were observed that, on average, precisely countered the direction of the 
alteration. These changes occurred in every participant and transferred to the 
production of single words with varying vowel sounds. The results show that to 
maintain accurate sentence production, the brain actively predicts the auditory 
consequences of variable sentence-level speech.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2018.07.030
PMID: 30245103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Exp Brain Res. 2003 Jan;148(1):128-32. doi: 10.1007/s00221-002-1317-0. Epub 2002 
Nov 16.

Transfer of sensorimotor adaptation between different movement categories.

Abeele S(1), Bock O.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Physiology, German Sports University, 50927 Köln, Germany.

It is well known that sensorimotor adaptation will transfer from the practiced 
to the unpracticed arm, which has been taken as evidence that adaptation is 
located in the brain before the divergence point for left and right arm control. 
We now explore whether adaptation will transfer between different movement 
categories as well. Subjects were exposed to a 60-deg visual rotation first in a 
tracking and then in a pointing task, or vice versa. We found a substantial 
transfer of adaptation between tasks, but its magnitude was larger from pointing 
to tracking than from tracking to pointing. This benefit of pointing persisted 
when the use of cognitive strategies was minimized by a concurrent, 
attention-demanding task, but it was lost when pointing amplitudes were very 
small. We conclude that adaptation is located in the brain before the divergence 
point for different movement categories, and that movements with a large 
ballistic component facilitate adaptation transfer.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-002-1317-0
PMID: 12478403 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Behav Brain Res. 2016 Jan 1;296:339-350. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2015.08.036. Epub 
2015 Oct 9.

Effect of prism adaptation on thermoregulatory control in humans.

Calzolari E(1), Gallace A(2), Moseley GL(3), Vallar G(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy; 
Neuropsychological Laboratory, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milan, Italy. 
Electronic address: e.calzolari@campus.unimib.it.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy; 
NeuroMi, Milan, Italy.
(3)The Sansom Institute for Health Research, University of South Australia, 
Adelaide, Australia; Neuroscience Research Australia, Sydney, Australia.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy; 
Neuropsychological Laboratory, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milan, Italy; 
NeuroMi, Milan, Italy.

The physiological regulation of skin temperature can be modulated not only by 
autonomic brain regions, but also by a network of higher-level cortical areas 
involved in the maintenance of a coherent representation of the body. In this 
study we assessed in healthy participants if the sensorimotor changes taking 
place during motor adaptation to the lateral displacement of the visual scene 
induced by wearing prismatic lenses (prism adaptation, PA), and the 
aftereffects, after prisms' removal, on the ability to process spatial 
coordinates, were associated with skin temperature regulation changes. We found 
a difference in thermoregulatory control as a function of the direction of the 
prism-induced displacement of the visual scene, and the subsequent sensorimotor 
adaptation. After PA to rightward displacing lenses, with leftward aftereffects 
(the same directional procedure efficaciously used for ameliorating left spatial 
neglect in right-brain-damaged patients) the hands' temperature decreased. 
Conversely, after adaptation to neutral lenses, and PA to leftward displacing 
lenses, with rightward aftereffects, the temperature of both hands increased. 
These results suggest a lateral asymmetry in the effects of PA on skin 
temperature regulation, and a relationship between body spatial representations 
and homeostatic control in humans.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2015.08.036
PMID: 26354443 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Hum Mov Sci. 2017 Oct;55:108-120. doi: 10.1016/j.humov.2017.08.006. Epub 2017 
Aug 12.

Properties of intermodal transfer after dual visuo- and auditory-motor 
adaptation.

Schmitz G(1), Bock OL(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Sports Science, Leibniz University Hannover, Am Moritzwinkel 6, 
30167 Hannover, Germany; Institute of Physiology and Anatomy, German Sport 
University Cologne, Am Sportpark Muengersdorf 6, 50933 Cologne, Germany. 
Electronic address: gerd.schmitz@sportwiss.uni-hannover.de.
(2)Institute of Physiology and Anatomy, German Sport University Cologne, Am 
Sportpark Muengersdorf 6, 50933 Cologne, Germany.

Previous work documented that sensorimotor adaptation transfers between sensory 
modalities: When subjects adapt with one arm to a visuomotor distortion while 
responding to visual targets, they also appear to be adapted when they are 
subsequently tested with auditory targets. Vice versa, when they adapt to an 
auditory-motor distortion while pointing to auditory targets, they appear to be 
adapted when they are subsequently tested with visual targets. Therefore, it was 
concluded that visuomotor as well as auditory-motor adaptation use the same 
adaptation mechanism. Furthermore, it has been proposed that sensory information 
from the trained modality is weighted larger than sensory information from an 
untrained one, because transfer between sensory modalities is incomplete. The 
present study tested these hypotheses for dual arm adaptation. One arm adapted 
to an auditory-motor distortion and the other either to an opposite directed 
auditory-motor or visuomotor distortion. We found that both arms adapted 
significantly. However, compared to reference data on single arm adaptation, 
adaptation in the dominant arm was reduced indicating interference from the 
non-dominant to the dominant arm. We further found that arm-specific 
aftereffects of adaptation, which reflect recalibration of sensorimotor 
transformation rules, were stronger or equally strong when targets were 
presented in the previously adapted compared to the non-adapted sensory 
modality, even when one arm adapted visually and the other auditorily. The 
findings are discussed with respect to a recently published schematic model on 
sensorimotor adaptation.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humov.2017.08.006
PMID: 28810171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Mot Behav. 2018 Sep-Oct;50(5):517-527. doi: 10.1080/00222895.2017.1371110. 
Epub 2017 Sep 22.

Multi-day Adaptation and Savings in Manual and Locomotor Tasks.

Ruitenberg MFL(1)(2), De Dios YE(3), Gadd NE(3), Wood SJ(4), Reuter-Lorenz 
PA(5), Kofman I(2), Bloomberg JJ(4), Mulavara AP(4), Seidler RD(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)a Neuromotor Behavior Lab, School of Kinesiology , University of Michigan , 
Ann Arbor.
(2)b Department of Experimental Psychology , Ghent University , Belgium.
(3)c Science, Technology, and Engineering Group, KBRwyle Houston , Texas.
(4)d NASA Johnson Space Center , Houston , Texas.
(5)e Department of Psychology , University of Michigan , Ann Arbor.

Using an individual differences approach, we evaluated whether manual and 
locomotor adaptation are associated in terms of adaptation and savings across 
days, and whether they rely on shared underlying mechanisms involving 
visuospatial working memory or visual field dependence. Participants performed a 
manual and a locomotor adaptation task during 4 separate test sessions over a 
3-month period. Reliable adaptation and savings were observed for both tasks. It 
was further found that higher visuospatial working memory performance and lower 
visual field dependence scores were associated with faster learning in the 
manual and locomotor tasks, respectively. Moreover, adaptation rates were 
correlated between the 2 tasks in the final test session, suggesting that people 
may gradually be learning something generalizable about the adaptation process.

DOI: 10.1080/00222895.2017.1371110
PMID: 28937868 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Dev Sci. 2018 Mar;21(2):10.1111/desc.12521. doi: 10.1111/desc.12521. Epub 2017 
Mar 2.

Auditory-motor adaptation is reduced in adults who stutter but not in children 
who stutter.

Daliri A(1)(2), Wieland EA(3), Cai S(4), Guenther FH(1), Chang SE(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Speech, Language, and Hearing Sciences, Boston University, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Speech and Hearing Science, Arizona State University, Tempe, 
AZ, USA.
(3)Department of Communicative Sciences & Disorders, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, MI, USA.
(4)Google, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

Previous studies have shown that adults who stutter produce smaller corrective 
motor responses to compensate for unexpected auditory perturbations in 
comparison to adults who do not stutter, suggesting that stuttering may be 
associated with deficits in integration of auditory feedback for online speech 
monitoring. In this study, we examined whether stuttering is also associated 
with deficiencies in integrating and using discrepancies between expected and 
received auditory feedback to adaptively update motor programs for accurate 
speech production. Using a sensorimotor adaptation paradigm, we measured 
adaptive speech responses to auditory formant frequency perturbations in adults 
and children who stutter and their matched nonstuttering controls. We found that 
the magnitude of the speech adaptive response for children who stutter did not 
differ from that of fluent children. However, the adaptation magnitude of adults 
who stutter in response to auditory perturbation was significantly smaller than 
the adaptation magnitude of adults who do not stutter. Together these results 
indicate that stuttering is associated with deficits in integrating 
discrepancies between predicted and received auditory feedback to calibrate the 
speech production system in adults but not children. This auditory-motor 
integration deficit thus appears to be a compensatory effect that develops over 
years of stuttering.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12521
PMCID: PMC5581739
PMID: 28256029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Neurosci. 2015 Oct 21;35(42):14386-96. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1046-15.2015.

Savings upon Re-Aiming in Visuomotor Adaptation.

Morehead JR(1), Qasim SE(2), Crossley MJ(3), Ivry R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, California 
94720, and ryanmorehead@seas.harvard.edu.
(2)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California, San Francisco, 
California 94143.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, California 
94720, and.

Sensorimotor adaptation has traditionally been viewed as a purely error-based 
process. There is, however, growing appreciation for the idea that performance 
changes in these tasks can arise from the interplay of error-based adaptation 
with other learning processes. The challenge is to specify constraints on these 
different processes, elucidating their respective contributions to performance, 
as well as the manner in which they interact. We address this question by 
exploring constraints on savings, the phenomenon in which people show faster 
performance gains when the same learning task is repeated. In a series of five 
experiments, we demonstrate that error-based learning associated with 
sensorimotor adaptation does not contribute to savings. Instead, savings 
reflects improvements in action selection, rather than motor execution.
SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Savings is the phenomenon in which people show faster 
relearning of a previously forgotten memory. In the motor learning domain, this 
phenomenon has been a puzzle for learning models that operate exclusively on 
error-based learning processes. We demonstrate, in a series of experiments, that 
savings selectively reflects improvements in action selection: Participants are 
more adept in invoking an appropriate aiming strategy when presented with a 
previously experienced perturbation. Indeed, improvements in action selection 
appear to be the sole source of savings in visuomotor adaptation tasks. We 
observe no evidence of savings in implicit error-based adaptation.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/3514386-11$15.00/0.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1046-15.2015
PMCID: PMC4683692
PMID: 26490874 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


95. PLoS Comput Biol. 2014 Jan;10(1):e1003377. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003377. 
Epub 2014 Jan 9.

Interference and shaping in sensorimotor adaptations with rewards.

Darshan R(1), Leblois A(2), Hansel D(3).

Author information:
(1)Edmond and Lily Safra Center for Brain Sciences, The Hebrew University, 
Jerusalem, Israel ; Laboratoire de Neurophysique et Physiologie UMR8119-CNRS 
Université René Descartes, Paris, France ; Interdisciplinary Center for Neural 
Computation, The Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel.
(2)Laboratoire de Neurophysique et Physiologie UMR8119-CNRS Université René 
Descartes, Paris, France.
(3)Laboratoire de Neurophysique et Physiologie UMR8119-CNRS Université René 
Descartes, Paris, France ; Interdisciplinary Center for Neural Computation, The 
Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel ; The Alexander Silberman Institute of Life 
Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel.

When a perturbation is applied in a sensorimotor transformation task, subjects 
can adapt and maintain performance by either relying on sensory feedback, or, in 
the absence of such feedback, on information provided by rewards. For example, 
in a classical rotation task where movement endpoints must be rotated to reach a 
fixed target, human subjects can successfully adapt their reaching movements 
solely on the basis of binary rewards, although this proves much more difficult 
than with visual feedback. Here, we investigate such a reward-driven 
sensorimotor adaptation process in a minimal computational model of the task. 
The key assumption of the model is that synaptic plasticity is gated by the 
reward. We study how the learning dynamics depend on the target size, the 
movement variability, the rotation angle and the number of targets. We show that 
when the movement is perturbed for multiple targets, the adaptation process for 
the different targets can interfere destructively or constructively depending on 
the similarities between the sensory stimuli (the targets) and the overlap in 
their neuronal representations. Destructive interferences can result in a 
drastic slowdown of the adaptation. As a result of interference, the time to 
adapt varies non-linearly with the number of targets. Our analysis shows that 
these interferences are weaker if the reward varies smoothly with the subject's 
performance instead of being binary. We demonstrate how shaping the reward or 
shaping the task can accelerate the adaptation dramatically by reducing the 
destructive interferences. We argue that experimentally investigating the 
dynamics of reward-driven sensorimotor adaptation for more than one sensory 
stimulus can shed light on the underlying learning rules.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003377
PMCID: PMC3886885
PMID: 24415925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


96. Science. 1998 Feb 20;279(5354):1213-6. doi: 10.1126/science.279.5354.1213.

Sensorimotor adaptation in speech production.

Houde JF(1), Jordan MI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. houde@phy.ucsf.edu

Comment in
    Science. 1998 Dec 11;282(5396):1994-5.

Human subjects are known to adapt their motor behavior to a shift of the visual 
field brought about by wearing prism glasses over their eyes. The analog of this 
phenomenon was studied in the speech domain. By use of a device that can feed 
back transformed speech signals in real time, subjects were exposed to 
phonetically sensible, online perturbations of their own speech patterns. It was 
found that speakers learn to adjust their production of a vowel to compensate 
for feedback alterations that change the vowel's perceived phonetic identity; 
moreover, the effect generalizes across phonetic contexts and to different 
vowels.

DOI: 10.1126/science.279.5354.1213
PMID: 9469813 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Hum Mov Sci. 2019 Jun;65:S0167-9457(17)30952-1. doi: 
10.1016/j.humov.2018.05.014. Epub 2018 Jun 14.

Direct-effects and after-effects of dynamic adaptation on intralimb and 
interlimb transfer.

Lei Y(1), Akbar A(2), Wang J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Kinesiology, University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee, Milwaukee, WI 
53201, USA; The Miami Project to Cure Paralysis, Department of Neurological 
Surgery, University of Miami - Miami, FL 33136, USA.
(2)Department of Kinesiology, University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee, Milwaukee, WI 
53201, USA.
(3)Department of Kinesiology, University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee, Milwaukee, WI 
53201, USA. Electronic address: wang34@uwm.edu.

After-effects following sensorimotor adaptation are generally considered as 
evidence for the formation of an internal model, although evidence lacks on 
whether the absence of after-effects necessarily indicates that the adaptation 
did not result in the formation of an internal model. Here, we examined direct- 
and after-effects of dynamic adaptation with one arm at one workspace on 
subsequent performance with the other arm, as well as the same arm at another 
workspace. During training, subjects performed reaching movements under a novel 
dynamic condition with the right arm; during testing, they performed reaching 
movements with the left or right arm at a new workspace, under either the same 
dynamic condition (direct-effects) or a normal condition (after-effects). 
Results showed significant transfer within the same arm in terms of both direct- 
and after-effects, but significant transfer across the arms only in terms of 
direct-effects. These findings suggest that the formation of an internal model 
does not always result in after-effects. They also support the idea that the 
neural representation developed after sensorimotor adaptation comprise some 
aspects that are effector independent and other aspects that are effector 
dependent; and that direct- and after-effects following sensorimotor adaptation 
mainly reflect the effector-independent and the effector-dependent aspects, 
respectively.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humov.2018.05.014
PMID: 29866428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Neurophysiol. 2011 Mar;105(3):1130-40. doi: 10.1152/jn.00394.2010. Epub 2010 
Dec 1.

Sensorimotor adaptation error signals are derived from realistic predictions of 
movement outcomes.

Wong AL(1), Shelhamer M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, The Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. aaron.wong@jhu.edu

Neural systems that control movement maintain accuracy by adaptively altering 
motor commands in response to errors. It is often assumed that the error signal 
that drives adaptation is equivalent to the sensory error observed at the 
conclusion of a movement; for saccades, this is typically the visual (retinal) 
error. However, we instead propose that the adaptation error signal is derived 
as the difference between the observed visual error and a realistic prediction 
of movement outcome. Using a modified saccade-adaptation task in human subjects, 
we precisely controlled the amount of error experienced at the conclusion of a 
movement by back-stepping the target so that the saccade is hypometric (positive 
retinal error), but less hypometric than if the target had not moved (smaller 
retinal error than expected). This separates prediction error from both visual 
errors and motor corrections. Despite positive visual errors and 
forward-directed motor corrections, we found an adaptive decrease in saccade 
amplitudes, a finding that is well-explained by the employment of a 
prediction-based error signal. Furthermore, adaptive changes in movement size 
were linearly correlated to the disparity between the predicted and observed 
movement outcomes, in agreement with the forward-model hypothesis of motor 
learning, which states that adaptation error signals incorporate predictions of 
motor outcomes computed using a copy of the motor command (efference copy).

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00394.2010
PMCID: PMC3074418
PMID: 21123665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Exp Brain Res. 2007 Feb;177(2):147-56. doi: 10.1007/s00221-006-0658-5. Epub 2006 
Sep 7.

Sensorimotor adaptation in response to proprioceptive bias.

Bernier PM(1), Chua R, Inglis JT, Franks IM.

Author information:
(1)School of Human Kinetics, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada.

Studies investigating visuo-motor adaptation typically introduce sensory 
conflicts by manipulating visual information (prisms, cursor gains). The purpose 
of the present study was to determine whether similar adaptation would be 
observed when a conflict is created through distortion of the proprioceptive 
sense, rather than through visual distortion. We used a coordinated movement 
task that required participants to release thumb and index finger at a specific 
elbow angle during passive elbow extension. Participants could not see their 
arm, but were shown a cursor representing the forearm on a video screen. In the 
proprioceptive group, a sensory conflict was introduced by vibrating the biceps 
brachii muscle, introducing a discrepancy of approximately 7.5 degrees between 
the proprioceptively perceived and visually perceived elbow angle. In the visual 
group, a conflict of similar magnitude was obtained by introducing a gain of 7.5 
degrees to the cursor with respect to forearm position. Adaptation was assessed 
by the presence of plastic changes in release elbow angles following a period of 
exposure to the sensory conflict (i.e., aftereffects). Both groups showed high 
accuracy during exposure despite the sensory conflicts. More importantly, the 
visual group presented large and persistent aftereffects, while the 
proprioceptive group presented none. We suggest that the proprioceptive group's 
lack of adaptation was due to the artificial muscle spindle activity resulting 
from vibration, which prevented visual and proprioceptive signals to be merged 
into a common frame of reference.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-006-0658-5
PMID: 16957884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Neurophysiol. 2020 Jan 1;123(1):57-69. doi: 10.1152/jn.00080.2019. Epub 2019 
Nov 13.

Environmental consistency modulation of error sensitivity during motor 
adaptation is explicitly controlled.

Avraham G(1)(2)(3)(4), Keizman M(2), Shmuelof L(1)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the 
Negev, Be'er Sheva, Israel.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, 
Be'er Sheva, Israel.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, California.
(4)Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley, 
California.
(5)Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, Ben-Gurion University of the 
Negev, Be'er Sheva, Israel.
(6)Zlotowski Center for Neuroscience, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Be'er 
Sheva, Israel.

Motor adaptation, the adjustment of a motor output in face of changes in the 
environment, may operate at different rates. When human participants encounter 
repeated or consistent perturbations, their corrections for the experienced 
errors are larger compared with when the perturbations are new or inconsistent. 
Such modulations of error sensitivity were traditionally considered to be an 
implicit process that does not require attentional resources. In recent years, 
the implicit view of motor adaptation has been challenged by evidence showing a 
contribution of explicit strategies to learning. These findings raise a 
fundamental question regarding the nature of the error sensitivity modulation 
processes. We tested the effect of explicit control on error sensitivity in a 
series of experiments, in which participants controlled a screen cursor to 
virtual targets. We manipulated environmental consistency by presenting 
rotations in random (low consistency) or random walk (high consistency) 
sequences and illustrated that perturbation consistency affects the rate of 
adaptation, corroborating previous studies. When participants were instructed to 
ignore the cursor and move directly to the target, thus eliminating the 
contribution of explicit strategies, consistency-driven error sensitivity 
modulation was not detected. In addition, delaying the visual feedback, a 
manipulation that affects implicit learning, did not influence error sensitivity 
under consistent perturbations. These results suggest that increases of learning 
rate in consistent environments are attributable to an explicit rather than 
implicit process in sensorimotor adaptation.NEW & NOTEWORTHY The consistency of 
an external perturbation modulates error sensitivity and the motor response. The 
roles of explicit and implicit processes in this modulation are unknown. We show 
that when humans are asked to ignore the perturbation, they do not show 
increased error sensitivity in consistent environments. When the implicit system 
is manipulated by delaying feedback, sensitivity to a consistent perturbation 
does not change. Overall, our results suggest that consistency affects 
adaptation mainly through explicit control.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00080.2019
PMID: 31721646


101. J Neurosci. 2010 Sep 1;30(35):11555-7. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3040-10.2010.

On the link between sensorimotor adaptation and sensory recalibration.

Sarlegna FR(1), Bernier PM.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Movement Sciences, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 
and Aix-Marseille Université, Marseille, France. fabrice.sarlegna@univmed.fr

Comment on
    J Neurosci. 2010 Apr 14;30(15):5384-93.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3040-10.2010
PMCID: PMC6633404
PMID: 20810876


102. Exp Brain Res. 2006 Nov;175(3):544-55. doi: 10.1007/s00221-006-0571-y. Epub 2006 
Jun 23.

Bilateral basal ganglia activation associated with sensorimotor adaptation.

Seidler RD(1), Noll DC, Chintalapati P.

Author information:
(1)Division of Kinesiology, University of Michigan, 401 Washtenaw Ave., Ann 
Arbor, MI 48109-2214, USA. rseidler@umich.edu

Sensorimotor adaptation tasks can be classified into two types. When subjects 
adapt movements to visual feedback perturbations such as in prism lens 
adaptation, they perform kinematic adaptations. When subjects adapt movements to 
force field perturbations such as with robotic manipulanda, they perform kinetic 
adaptations. Neuroimaging studies have shown basal ganglia involvement in 
kinetic adaptations, but have found little evidence of basal ganglia involvement 
in kinematic adaptations, despite reports of deficits in patients with diseases 
of the basal ganglia, such as Parkinson's and Huntington's disease, in these. In 
an effort to resolve such apparent discrepancy, we used FMRI to focus on the 
first few minutes of practice during kinematic adaptation. Human subjects 
adapted to visuomotor rotations in the context of a joystick aiming task while 
lying supine in a 3.0 T MRI scanner. As demonstrated previously, early adaptive 
processes were associated with BOLD activation in the cerebellum and the sensory 
and motor cortical regions. A novel finding of this study was bilateral basal 
ganglia activation. This suggests that, at least for early learning, the neural 
correlates of kinematic adaptation parallel those of other types of skill 
learning. We observed activation in the right globus pallidus and putamen, along 
with the right prefrontal, premotor and parietal cortex, which may support 
spatial cognitive processes of adaptation. We also observed activation in the 
left globus pallidus and caudate nucleus, along with the left premotor and 
supplementary motor cortex, which may support the sensorimotor processes of 
adaptation. These results are the first to demonstrate a clear involvement of 
basal ganglia activation in this type of kinematic motor adaptation.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-006-0571-y
PMID: 16794848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Eur J Neurosci. 2011 Dec;34(11):1817-22. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2011.07889.x. 
Epub 2011 Nov 18.

Sensorimotor integration for speech motor learning involves the inferior 
parietal cortex.

Shum M(1), Shiller DM, Baum SR, Gracco VL.

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Major Program, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Sensorimotor integration is important for motor learning. The inferior parietal 
lobe, through its connections with the frontal lobe and cerebellum, has been 
associated with multisensory integration and sensorimotor adaptation for motor 
behaviors other than speech. In the present study, the contribution of the 
inferior parietal cortex to speech motor learning was evaluated using repetitive 
transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) prior to a speech motor adaptation 
task. Subjects' auditory feedback was altered in a manner consistent with the 
auditory consequences of an unintended change in tongue position during speech 
production, and adaptation performance was used to evaluate sensorimotor 
plasticity and short-term learning. Prior to the feedback alteration, rTMS or 
sham stimulation was applied over the left supramarginal gyrus (SMG). Subjects 
who underwent the sham stimulation exhibited a robust adaptive response to the 
feedback alteration whereas subjects who underwent rTMS exhibited a diminished 
adaptive response. The results suggest that the inferior parietal region, in and 
around SMG, plays a role in sensorimotor adaptation for speech. The 
interconnections of the inferior parietal cortex with inferior frontal cortex, 
cerebellum and primary sensory areas suggest that this region may be an 
important component in learning and adapting sensorimotor patterns for speech.

© 2011 The Authors. European Journal of Neuroscience © 2011 Federation of 
European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2011.07889.x
PMCID: PMC3703318
PMID: 22098364 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Aging Phys Act. 2013 Jul;21(3):272-89. doi: 10.1123/japa.21.3.272. Epub 2012 
Sep 18.

Sensorimotor adaptation training's effect on head stabilization in response to a 
lateral perturbation in older adults.

Buccello-Stout RR(1), Cromwell RL, Bloomberg JJ, Whorton EB.

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Laboratories, Wyle Integrated Science and Engineering, Houston, 
TX, USA.

The goal of this study was to determine if exposure to sensorimotor adaptation 
training improved head stabilization in older adults. Sixteen participants, age 
66-81 yr, were assigned at random to the control group (n = 8) or the 
experimental group (n = 8). Both groups first completed 6 trials of walking a 
foam pathway consisting of a moveable platform that induced a lateral 
perturbation during walking. Head-in-space and trunk-in-space angular velocities 
were collected. Participants from both groups then trained twice per week for 4 
wk. Both groups walked on a treadmill for 20 min. The control group viewed a 
static scene. The experimental group viewed a rotating visual scene that 
provided a perceptual-motor mismatch. After training, both groups were retested 
on the perturbation pathway test. The experimental group used a movement 
strategy that preserved head stabilization compared with the controls (p < .05). 
This training effect was not retained after 4 wk.

DOI: 10.1123/japa.21.3.272
PMID: 23006335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Psychol Sci. 2001 Nov;12(6):532-5. doi: 10.1111/1467-9280.d01-17.

Sensorimotor adaptation to violations of temporal contiguity.

Cunningham DW(1), Billock VA, Tsou BH.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics, Tübingen, Germany. 
douglas.cunningham@tuebingen.mpg.de

Most events are processed by a number of neural pathways. These pathways often 
differ considerably in processing speed. Thus, coherent perception requires some 
form of synchronization mechanism. Moreover, this mechanism must be flexible, 
because neural processing speed changes over the life of an organism. Here we 
provide behavioral evidence that humans can adapt to a new intersensory temporal 
relationship (which was artificially produced by delaying visual feedback). The 
conflict between these results and previous work that failed to find such 
improvements can be explained by considering the present results as a form of 
sensorimotor adaptation.

DOI: 10.1111/1467-9280.d01-17
PMID: 11760144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Hum Mov Sci. 2019 May 4;66:186-197. doi: 10.1016/j.humov.2019.04.013. Online 
ahead of print.

Gait symmetric adaptation: Comparing effects of implicit visual distortion 
versus split-belt treadmill on aftereffects of adapted step length symmetry.

Chunduru P(1), Kim SJ(2), Lee H(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological and Health Systems Engineering, Arizona State 
University, Tempe, AZ 85287, United States.
(2)Biomedical Engineering, California Baptist University, Riverside, CA 92504, 
United States. Electronic address: sjkim@calbaptist.edu.
(3)School for Engineering of Matter, Transport, and Energy, Arizona State 
University, Tempe, AZ 85287, United States.

Understanding gait adaptation is essential for rehabilitation, and visual 
feedback can be used during gait rehabilitation to develop effective gait 
training. We have previously shown that subjects can adapt spatial aspects of 
walking to an implicitly imposed distortion of visual feedback of step length. 
To further investigate the storage benefit of an implicit process engaged in 
visual feedback distortion, we compared the robustness of aftereffects acquired 
by visual feedback distortion, versus split-belt treadmill walking. For the 
visual distortion trial, we implicitly distorted the visual representation of 
subjects' gait symmetry, whereas for the split-belt trial, the speed ratio of 
the two belts was gradually adjusted without visual feedback. After adaptation, 
the visual feedback or the split-belt perturbation was removed while subjects 
continued walking, and aftereffects of preserved asymmetric pattern were 
assessed. We found that subjects trained with visual distortion trial retained 
aftereffects longest. In response to the larger speed ratio of split-belt 
walking, the subjects showed an increase in the size of aftereffects compared to 
the smaller speed ratio, but it steeply decreased over time in all the speed 
ratios tested. In contrast, the visual distortion group showed much slower 
decreasing rate of aftereffects, which was evidence of longer storage of an 
adapted gait pattern. Visual distortion adaptation may involve the interaction 
and integration of the change in motor strategy and implicit process in 
sensorimotor adaptation. Although it should be clarified more clearly through 
further studies, the findings of this study suggest that gait control employs 
distinct adaptive processes during the visual distortion and split-belt walking 
and also the level of reliance of an implicit process may be greater in the 
visual distortion adaptation than the split-belt walking adaptation.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humov.2019.04.013
PMID: 31063927


107. J Neurophysiol. 2017 Jan 1;117(1):429-435. doi: 10.1152/jn.00563.2016. Epub 2016 
Nov 2.

Right prefrontal cortex transcranial direct current stimulation enhances 
multi-day savings in sensorimotor adaptation.

Seidler RD(1)(2), Gluskin BS(3), Greeley B(3)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Kinesiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan; and 
rseidler@umich.edu.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(3)School of Kinesiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan; and.

We have previously reported that visuospatial working memory performance and 
magnitude of activation in the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex predict the 
rate of visuomotor adaptation. Recent behavioral studies suggest that 
sensorimotor savings, or faster relearning on second exposure to a task, are due 
to recall of these early, strategic components of adaptation. In the present 
study we applied anodal transcranial direct current stimulation to right or left 
prefrontal cortex or left motor cortex. We found that all groups adapted dart 
throwing movements while wearing prism lenses at the same rate as subjects 
receiving sham stimulation on day 1 On test day 2, which was conducted a few 
days later, the right prefrontal and left motor cortex groups adapted faster 
than the sham group. Moreover, only the right prefrontal group exhibited greater 
savings, expressed as a greater difference between day 1 and day 2 errors, 
compared with sham stimulation. These findings support the hypothesis that the 
right prefrontal cortex contributes to sensorimotor adaptation and savings.
NEW & NOTEWORTHY: We have previously reported that visuospatial working memory 
performance and magnitude of activation in the right dorsolateral prefrontal 
cortex predict the rate of manual visuomotor adaptation. Sensorimotor savings, 
or faster adaptation to a previously experienced perturbation, has been recently 
linked to cognitive processes. We show that facilitating the right prefrontal 
cortex with anodal transcranial direct current stimulation enhances sensorimotor 
savings compared with sham stimulation.

Copyright © 2017 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00563.2016
PMCID: PMC5253398
PMID: 27832598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Acoust Soc Am. 2007 Oct;122(4):2306-19. doi: 10.1121/1.2773966.

Sensorimotor adaptation to feedback perturbations of vowel acoustics and its 
relation to perception.

Villacorta VM(1), Perkell JS, Guenther FH.

Author information:
(1)Speech Communication Group, Research Laboratory of Electronics, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, Room 36-591, 50 Vassar Street, Cambridge, Massachusetts 
02139, USA.

The role of auditory feedback in speech motor control was explored in three 
related experiments. Experiment 1 investigated auditory sensorimotor adaptation: 
the process by which speakers alter their speech production to compensate for 
perturbations of auditory feedback. When the first formant frequency (F1) was 
shifted in the feedback heard by subjects as they produced vowels in 
consonant-vowel-consonant (CVC) words, the subjects' vowels demonstrated 
compensatory formant shifts that were maintained when auditory feedback was 
subsequently masked by noise-evidence of adaptation. Experiment 2 investigated 
auditory discrimination of synthetic vowel stimuli differing in F1 frequency, 
using the same subjects. Those with more acute F1 discrimination had compensated 
more to F1 perturbation. Experiment 3 consisted of simulations with the 
directions into velocities of articulators model of speech motor planning, which 
showed that the model can account for key aspects of compensation. In the model, 
movement goals for vowels are regions in auditory space; perturbation of 
auditory feedback invokes auditory feedback control mechanisms that correct for 
the perturbation, which in turn causes updating of feedforward commands to 
incorporate these corrections. The relation between speaker acuity and amount of 
compensation to auditory perturbation is mediated by the size of speakers' 
auditory goal regions, with more acute speakers having smaller goal regions.

DOI: 10.1121/1.2773966
PMID: 17902866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Neurophysiol. 2017 Jan 1;117(1):412-428. doi: 10.1152/jn.01141.2015. Epub 2016 
Nov 2.

Individual differences in implicit motor learning: task specificity in 
sensorimotor adaptation and sequence learning.

Stark-Inbar A(1), Raza M(2), Taylor JA(3), Ivry RB(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, California; 
alit.stark@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, California.
(3)Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey.
(4)Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley, 
California; and.

In standard taxonomies, motor skills are typically treated as representative of 
implicit or procedural memory. We examined two emblematic tasks of implicit 
motor learning, sensorimotor adaptation and sequence learning, asking whether 
individual differences in learning are correlated between these tasks, as well 
as how individual differences within each task are related to different 
performance variables. As a prerequisite, it was essential to establish the 
reliability of learning measures for each task. Participants were tested twice 
on a visuomotor adaptation task and on a sequence learning task, either the 
serial reaction time task or the alternating reaction time task. Learning was 
evident in all tasks at the group level and reliable at the individual level in 
visuomotor adaptation and the alternating reaction time task but not in the 
serial reaction time task. Performance variability was predictive of learning in 
both domains, yet the relationship was in the opposite direction for adaptation 
and sequence learning. For the former, faster learning was associated with lower 
variability, consistent with models of sensorimotor adaptation in which learning 
rates are sensitive to noise. For the latter, greater learning was associated 
with higher variability and slower reaction times, factors that may facilitate 
the spread of activation required to form predictive, sequential associations. 
Interestingly, learning measures of the different tasks were not correlated. 
Together, these results oppose a shared process for implicit learning in 
sensorimotor adaptation and sequence learning and provide insight into the 
factors that account for individual differences in learning within each task 
domain.
NEW & NOTEWORTHY: We investigated individual differences in the ability to 
implicitly learn motor skills. As a prerequisite, we assessed whether individual 
differences were reliable across test sessions. We found that two commonly used 
tasks of implicit learning, visuomotor adaptation and the alternating serial 
reaction time task, exhibited good test-retest reliability in measures of 
learning and performance. However, the learning measures did not correlate 
between the two tasks, arguing against a shared process for implicit motor 
learning.

Copyright © 2017 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.01141.2015
PMCID: PMC5253399
PMID: 27832611 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Exp Brain Res. 2010 Apr;201(4):621-30. doi: 10.1007/s00221-009-2076-y. Epub 2009 
Dec 11.

Adaptation of the precision grip orientation to a visual-haptic mismatch.

Weigelt C(1), Bock O.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Physiology and Anatomy, German Sport University, Cologne, 
Germany. weigelt@nf.mpg.de

Using a sequential-exposure approach, we examined sensorimotor adaptation of 
precision grip orientation to a visuo-haptic mismatch. Subjects (n = 41) were 
asked to grasp with thumb and index finger mirror-viewed objects. They could not 
see their hand due to the mirror, but they could feel an object located behind 
the mirror in the same place as the viewed object. When a -15 degrees 
orientation mismatch between viewed and felt object was introduced, subjects 
adapted to it by gradually modifying the orientation of their finger opposition 
axis. When the visuo-haptic mismatch further changed to -30 degrees or to +15 
degrees , subjects continued to perform according to their pre-established 
adaptive state, and gradually modified it until it became adequate for the new 
mismatch. This outcome supports the existence of a continuously acting mechanism 
for grasping adaptation, similar to that previously described for pointing and 
tracking adaptation. Precision grip adaptation generalized to unpracticed object 
orientations, which suggests that adaptation was based on a sensorimotor 
recalibration rather than the learning of specific stimulus-response pairs. 
Transfer to pointing movements was found only when similarity to the grasp 
adaptation task was high.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-009-2076-y
PMID: 20012539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Neurobiol Aging. 2020 Jun;90:13-23. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2020.02.016. 
Epub 2020 Feb 20.

Age-related reduction in motor adaptation: brain structural correlates and the 
role of explicit memory.

Wolpe N(1), Ingram JN(2), Tsvetanov KA(3), Henson RN(4), Wolpert DM(2); 
Cam-CAN(5), Rowe JB(6).

Collaborators: Tyler LK(5), Brayne C(5), Bullmore ET(5), Calder AC(5), Cusack 
R(5), Dalgleish T(5), Duncan J(5), Matthews FE(5), Marslen-Wilson WD(5), Shafto 
MA(5), Campbell K(5), Cheung T(5), Davis S(5), Geerligs L(5), Kievit R(5), 
McCarrey A(5), Mustafa A(5), Price D(5), Samu D(5), Taylor JR(5), Treder M(5), 
van Belle J(5), Williams N(5), Bates L(5), Emery T(5), Erzinçlioglu S(5), Gadie 
A(5), Gerbase S(5), Georgieva S(5), Hanley C(5), Parkin B(5), Troy D(5), Auer 
T(5), Correia M(5), Gao L(5), Green E(5), Henriques R(5), Allen J(5), Amery 
G(5), Amunts L(5), Barcroft A(5), Castle A(5), Dias C(5), Dowrick J(5), Fair 
M(5), Fisher H(5), Goulding A(5), Grewal A(5), Hale G(5), Hilton A(5), Johnson 
F(5), Johnston P(5), Kavanagh-Williamson T(5), Kwasniewska M(5), McMinn A(5), 
Norman K(5), Penrose J(5), Roby F(5), Rowland D(5), Sargeant J(5), Squire M(5), 
Stevens B(5), Stoddart A(5), Stone C(5), Thompson T(5), Yazlik O(5), Barnes 
D(5), Dixon M(5), Hillman J(5), Mitchell J(5), Villis L(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK; 
Medical Research Council Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. Electronic address: nw305@medschl.cam.ac.uk.
(2)Computational and Biological Learning Laboratory, Department of Engineering, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK; Zuckerman Mind Brain Behavior Institute, 
Department of Neuroscience, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK; 
Centre for Speech, Language and the Brain, Department of Psychology, University 
of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(4)Medical Research Council Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(5)Cambridge Centre for Ageing and Neuroscience (Cam-CAN), University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(6)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK; 
Medical Research Council Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

The adaption of movement to changes in the environment varies across life span. 
Recent evidence has linked motor adaptation and its reduction with age to 
differences in "explicit" learning processes. We examine differences in brain 
structure and cognition underlying motor adaptation in a population-based cohort 
(n = 322, aged 18-89 years) using a visuomotor learning task and structural 
magnetic resonance imaging. Reduced motor adaptation with age was associated 
with reduced volume in striatum, prefrontal, and sensorimotor cortical regions, 
but not cerebellum. Medial temporal lobe volume, including the hippocampus, 
became a stronger determinant of motor adaptation with age. Consistent with the 
role of the medial temporal lobes, declarative long-term memory showed a similar 
interaction, whereby memory was more positively correlated with motor adaptation 
with increasing age. By contrast, visual short-term memory was related to motor 
adaptation, independently of age. These results support the hypothesis that 
cerebellar learning is largely unaffected in old age, and the reduction in motor 
adaptation with age is driven by a decline in explicit memory systems.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2020.02.016
PMCID: PMC7181181
PMID: 32184030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


112. F1000Res. 2013 Oct 14;2:215. doi: 10.12688/f1000research.2-215.v1. eCollection 
2013.

Prism adaptation does not alter configural processing of faces.

Bultitude JH(1), Downing PE(2), Rafal RD(2).

Author information:
(1)Oxford Centre for Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the Brain (FMRIB), 
Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX3 
9DU, UK.
(2)Wolfson Centre for Clinical and Cognitive Neuroscience, School of Psychology, 
Bangor University, Gwynedd, LL57 2AS, UK.

Patients with hemispatial neglect ('neglect') following a brain lesion show 
difficulty responding or orienting to objects and events on the left side of 
space. Substantial evidence supports the use of a sensorimotor training 
technique called prism adaptation as a treatment for neglect. Reaching for 
visual targets viewed through prismatic lenses that induce a rightward shift in 
the visual image results in a leftward recalibration of reaching movements that 
is accompanied by a reduction of symptoms in patients with neglect. The 
understanding of prism adaptation has also been advanced through studies of 
healthy participants, in whom adaptation to leftward prismatic shifts results in 
temporary neglect-like performance. Interestingly, prism adaptation can also 
alter aspects of non-lateralised spatial attention. We previously demonstrated 
that prism adaptation alters the extent to which neglect patients and healthy 
participants process local features versus global configurations of visual 
stimuli. Since deficits in non-lateralised spatial attention are thought to 
contribute to the severity of neglect symptoms, it is possible that the effect 
of prism adaptation on these deficits contributes to its efficacy. This study 
examines the pervasiveness of the effects of prism adaptation on perception by 
examining the effect of prism adaptation on configural face processing using a 
composite face task. The composite face task is a persuasive demonstration of 
the automatic global-level processing of faces: the top and bottom halves of two 
familiar faces form a seemingly new, unknown face when viewed together. 
Participants identified the top or bottom halves of composite faces before and 
after prism adaptation. Sensorimotor adaptation was confirmed by significant 
pointing aftereffect, however there was no significant change in the extent to 
which the irrelevant face half interfered with processing. The results support 
the proposal that the therapeutic effects of prism adaptation are limited to 
dorsal stream processing.

DOI: 10.12688/f1000research.2-215.v1
PMCID: PMC4111122
PMID: 25110574

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: No relevant competing 
interests disclosed.


113. Front Hum Neurosci. 2014 Apr 17;8:208. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2014.00208. 
eCollection 2014.

Lexical-perceptual integration influences sensorimotor adaptation in speech.

Bourguignon NJ(1), Baum SR(2), Shiller DM(1).

Author information:
(1)Research Center, Sainte-Justine Hospital, Université de Montréal Montreal, 
QC, Canada ; School of Speech Pathology and Audiology, Université de Montréal 
Montreal, QC, Canada ; Centre for Research on Brain, Language and Music, McGill 
University Montreal, QC, Canada.
(2)Centre for Research on Brain, Language and Music, McGill University Montreal, 
QC, Canada ; School of Communication Sciences and Disorders, McGill University 
Montreal, QC, Canada.

A combination of lexical bias and altered auditory feedback was used to 
investigate the influence of higher-order linguistic knowledge on the perceptual 
aspects of speech motor control. Subjects produced monosyllabic real words or 
pseudo-words containing the vowel [ε] (as in "head") under conditions of altered 
auditory feedback involving a decrease in vowel first formant (F1) frequency. 
This manipulation had the effect of making the vowel sound more similar to [I] 
(as in "hid"), affecting the lexical status of produced words in two 
Lexical-Change (LC) groups (either changing them from real words to 
pseudo-words: e.g., less-liss, or pseudo-words to real words: e.g., kess-kiss). 
Two Non-Lexical-Change (NLC) control groups underwent the same auditory feedback 
manipulation during the production of [ε] real- or pseudo-words, only without 
any resulting change in lexical status (real words to real words: e.g., 
mess-miss, or pseudo-words to pseudo-words: e.g., ness-niss). The results from 
the LC groups indicate that auditory-feedback-based speech motor learning is 
sensitive to the lexical status of the stimuli being produced, in that speakers 
tend to keep their acoustic speech outcomes within the auditory-perceptual space 
corresponding to the task-related side of the word/non-word boundary (real words 
or pseudo-words). For the NLC groups, however, no such effect of lexical status 
is observed.

DOI: 10.3389/fnhum.2014.00208
PMCID: PMC4029003
PMID: 24860460


114. Vision Res. 2019 Jul;160:82-98. doi: 10.1016/j.visres.2019.05.001. Epub 2019 May 
24.

Inter-individual variability and consistency of saccade adaptation in oblique 
saccades: Amplitude increase and decrease in the horizontal or vertical saccade 
component.

Rahmouni S(1), Madelain L(2).

Author information:
(1)Univ. Lille, CNRS, CHU Lille, UMR 9193 - SCALab - Sciences Cognitives et 
Sciences Affectives, F-59000 Lille, France.
(2)Univ. Lille, CNRS, CHU Lille, UMR 9193 - SCALab - Sciences Cognitives et 
Sciences Affectives, F-59000 Lille, France; Aix Marseille Université, CNRS, 
Institut de Neurosciences de la Timone, UMR 7289, Marseille, France. Electronic 
address: laurent.madelain@univ-lille3.fr.

Despite changes in the physical structures controlling the eyes, saccades, the 
rapid eye movements used to explore the visual environment, remain accurate 
throughout the lifetime. The process underlying this sensorimotor adaptation is 
studied using a double step paradigm: an intra-saccadic target displacement 
introduces a systematic position error which triggers changes in saccadic 
amplitude or direction across trials. Numerous researches on this saccade 
adaptation have been conducted, but the level of inter-individual variability 
and consistency in saccade gain change and how it relates to increase- or 
decrease-amplitude paradigms is not fully described. We conducted experiments in 
four groups of 25 participants with 800 trials per participant, including 200 
baseline trials and 200 recovery trials. We used four distinct double-step 
paradigms that differed by the intra-saccadic target-step leading to either a 
horizontal (Backward or Forward) or vertical (Upward or Downward) gain 
modulation. Across experiments 95% of the participants exhibited adaptation, 
revealing the consistency of this phenomenon. We observed strong 
inter-individual differences, both in the extent and rate of adaptation, which 
were not correlated with the individual baseline saccades characteristics. As 
previously reported, the rates of adaptation were higher for gain decrease than 
for gain increase experiments but the final extent of adaptation were similar. 
Our results also support the view that adaptation of oblique saccades occurs 
where the saccade command is represented as a vector. Finally, at the individual 
level, we did not observe systematic changes in the saccade metrics in relation 
to adaptation.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.visres.2019.05.001
PMID: 31082404 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Exp Psychol Hum Percept Perform. 2018 Feb;44(2):176-194. doi: 
10.1037/xhp0000440. Epub 2017 May 15.

Decomposition of a sensory prediction error signal for visuomotor adaptation.

Butcher PA(1), Taylor JA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Princeton University.

To accomplish effective motor control, the brain contains an internal forward 
model that predicts the expected sensory consequence of a motor command. When 
this prediction is inaccurate, a sensory prediction error is produced which 
adapts the forward model to make more accurate predictions of future movements. 
Other types of errors, such as task performance errors or reward, play less of a 
role in adapting a forward model. This raises the following question: What 
unique information is conveyed by the sensory prediction error that results in 
forward model adaptation? sensory prediction errors typically contain both the 
magnitude and direction of the error, but it is unclear if both components are 
necessary for adaptation or a single component is sufficient. In this article, 
we address this by having participants learn to counter a visuomotor rotation, 
which induces an angular mismatch between movements of the hand and visual 
feedback. We manipulated the information content of the visual feedback, in the 
form of a line, which accurately represented only the magnitude (distance), 
direction, or both magnitude and direction, of the virtual cursor relative to 
the target. We demonstrate that sensorimotor adaptation does not occur, or is 
minimal, when feedback is limited to information about the magnitude of an 
error. In contrast, sensorimotor adaptation is present when feedback is limited 
only to the direction of an error or when it contains combined direction and 
magnitude information. This result stands in contrast to current computational 
models of cerebellar-based sensorimotor adaptation that use error magnitude to 
drive adaptation. (PsycINFO Database Record

(c) 2018 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/xhp0000440
PMCID: PMC5685953
PMID: 28504523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.


116. Exp Brain Res. 2005 Jan;160(2):259-63. doi: 10.1007/s00221-004-2133-5. Epub 2004 
Nov 25.

Components of sensorimotor adaptation in young and elderly subjects.

Bock O(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Physiology and Anatomy, German Sport University, 50927, Köln, 
Germany. bock@dshs-koeln.de

Previous studies have found that sensorimotor adaptation to visual distortions 
is degraded in seniors compared with younger subjects, whereas after-effects on 
removal of the distortion are age-independent. The latter finding was 
interpreted as evidence that adaptive recalibration is not affected by old age, 
and that the observed degradation is therefore due to impairment of strategic 
control. However, after-effects are not a reliable measure of recalibration, 
because they can be artificially inflated by perseveration, a characteristic 
symptom in old age. The present work therefore introduces a test of 
recalibration which is insensitive to perseveration. Twelve young and twelve old 
subjects executed center-out pointing movements while visual feedback about 
their fingertip was either veridical (baseline), 60-deg rotated (adaptation), or 
absent (after-effect). They also executed tracking movements toward an 
unpredictably moving object before and after the pointing task. Seniors adapted 
less than younger subjects but their after-effects were not degraded. More 
importantly, transfer of adaptation from a pointing to a tracking task was not 
degraded in seniors. The latter outcome documents, in a more compelling fashion 
than previous work, that recalibration in the elderly is not impaired, and that 
the observed deficit of adaptation is therefore most probably because of 
impaired strategic control. This conclusion is supported by two additional 
findings: compared with young subjects our seniors performed less well on a 
cognitive screening test and acquired no explicit knowledge about the nature of 
the imposed visual distortion.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-004-2133-5
PMID: 15565436 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Neurophysiol. 2009 Sep;102(3):1868-79. doi: 10.1152/jn.00063.2009. Epub 2009 
Jul 15.

Changes in performance monitoring during sensorimotor adaptation.

Anguera JA(1), Seidler RD, Gehring WJ.

Author information:
(1)School of Kinesiology, Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI, USA. janguera@umich.edu

Error detection and correction are essential components of motor skill learning. 
These processes have been well characterized in cognitive psychology using 
electroencephalography (EEG) to record an event-related potential (ERP) called 
error-related negativity (ERN). However, it is unclear whether this ERP 
component is sensitive to the magnitude of the error made in a sensorimotor 
adaptation task. In the present study, we tested the function of error-related 
activity in a visuomotor adaptation task. To examine whether error size is 
reflected in the ERP, two groups of participants adapted manual aiming movements 
to either a small (30 degrees) or large (45 degrees) rotation of the visual 
feedback display. Each participant's trials were sorted into large and small 
error trials using a median split to examine potential error magnitude waveform 
differences. We also examined these trial types at the early and late stages of 
adaptation. There were no group differences for the behavioral or neural 
measures; however, waveforms from large error trials were significantly 
different from small error trials. The waveforms also changed as a function of 
practice as early adaptation waveforms were larger than late adaptation 
waveforms. The observed ERP component reflected differences in error magnitude 
with the amount of activity corresponding to the size of the error. Movement 
monitoring potentials likely affected the frequency and time course of the 
waveform so that it did not resemble the typical ERN; however, error-related 
activity was still distinguishable. The present findings are discussed in terms 
of current theories of the ERN as well as skill acquisition.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00063.2009
PMCID: PMC2746769
PMID: 19605614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Exp Brain Res. 2018 Aug;236(8):2173-2184. doi: 10.1007/s00221-018-5288-1. Epub 
2018 May 23.

How does ageing affect grasp adaptation to a visual-haptic size conflict?

Couth S(1), Gowen E(2), Poliakoff E(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Human Communication, Development and Hearing, School of Health 
Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, The University of Manchester, 
A3.16 Ellen Wilkinson Building, Oxford Road, M13 9PL, Manchester, UK. 
Samuel.couth@manchester.ac.uk.
(2)Division of Neuroscience and Experimental Psychology, School of Biological 
Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, The University of Manchester, 
Zochonis Building, Oxford Road, M13 9PL, Manchester, UK.

Previous research suggests that the ability to adapt motor behaviour to sudden 
environmental changes may be impaired in older adults. Here, we investigated 
whether the adaptation of grasping behaviour in response to a visual-haptic size 
conflict is also affected by increasing age. 30 older and 18 young adults were 
instructed to grasp a hidden block whilst viewing a second block in a congruent 
position. Initially block sizes were equal, but after a set number of trials a 
sensory conflict was introduced by covertly changing the hidden block for a 
smaller or larger block. The scale and speed of maximum grasp aperture 
adaptation to the increase or decrease in the size of the hidden block was 
measured. Older adults successfully adapted to the visual-haptic size conflict 
in a similar manner to young adults, despite a tendency to adapt less when the 
hidden block increased in size. This finding is attributed to the physical 
capabilities of the grasping hand of older adults, rather than an effect of 
age-related sensory or cognitive decline. The speed of grasp adaptation did not 
differ between age groups; however, awareness of the visual-haptic conflict lead 
to faster adaptation. These findings suggest that sensorimotor adaptation for 
grasping is intact for cognitively healthy older adults.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-018-5288-1
PMCID: PMC6061465
PMID: 29796755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST: The author(s) declare that 
they have no conflict of interest. INFORMED CONSENT: The study was approved by 
the University of Manchester Research Ethics Committee in accordance with the 
Declaration of Helsinki 1964, and written informed consent was obtained from all 
participants.


119. J Neurophysiol. 2015 Apr 1;113(7):2360-75. doi: 10.1152/jn.00483.2014. Epub 2015 
Jan 21.

Asymmetric generalization in adaptation to target displacement errors in humans 
and in a neural network model.

Westendorff S(1), Kuang S(2), Taghizadeh B(2), Donchin O(3), Gail A(4).

Author information:
(1)German Primate Center, Göttingen, Germany; Bernstein Center for Computational 
Neuroscience, Göttingen, Germany;
(2)German Primate Center, Göttingen, Germany;
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering and Zlotowski Center for Neuroscience, 
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel; and Department of 
Neuroscience, Erasmus Medical College, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)German Primate Center, Göttingen, Germany; Bernstein Center for Computational 
Neuroscience, Göttingen, Germany; agail@gwdg.de.

Different error signals can induce sensorimotor adaptation during visually 
guided reaching, possibly evoking different neural adaptation mechanisms. Here 
we investigate reach adaptation induced by visual target errors without 
perturbing the actual or sensed hand position. We analyzed the spatial 
generalization of adaptation to target error to compare it with other known 
generalization patterns and simulated our results with a neural network model 
trained to minimize target error independent of prediction errors. Subjects 
reached to different peripheral visual targets and had to adapt to a sudden 
fixed-amplitude displacement ("jump") consistently occurring for only one of the 
reach targets. Subjects simultaneously had to perform contralateral unperturbed 
saccades, which rendered the reach target jump unnoticeable. As a result, 
subjects adapted by gradually decreasing reach errors and showed negative 
aftereffects for the perturbed reach target. Reach errors generalized to 
unperturbed targets according to a translational rather than rotational 
generalization pattern, but locally, not globally. More importantly, reach 
errors generalized asymmetrically with a skewed generalization function in the 
direction of the target jump. Our neural network model reproduced the skewed 
generalization after adaptation to target jump without having been explicitly 
trained to produce a specific generalization pattern. Our combined 
psychophysical and simulation results suggest that target jump adaptation in 
reaching can be explained by gradual updating of spatial motor goal 
representations in sensorimotor association networks, independent of learning 
induced by a prediction-error about the hand position. The simulations make 
testable predictions about the underlying changes in the tuning of sensorimotor 
neurons during target jump adaptation.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00483.2014
PMCID: PMC4416567
PMID: 25609106 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Exp Brain Res. 2013 Nov;231(1):1-11. doi: 10.1007/s00221-013-3662-6. Epub 2013 
Aug 21.

Effects of structural and functional cerebellar lesions on sensorimotor 
adaptation of saccades.

Panouillères M(1), Alahyane N, Urquizar C, Salemme R, Nighoghossian N, Gaymard 
B, Tilikete C, Pélisson D.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U1028, CNRS UMR5292, ImpAct Team, Lyon Neuroscience Research Center, 
69000, Lyon, France, muriel.panouilleres@inserm.fr.

The cerebellum is critically involved in the adaptation mechanisms that maintain 
the accuracy of goal-directed acts such as saccadic eye movements. Two 
categories of saccades, each relying on different adaptation mechanisms, are 
defined: reactive (externally triggered) saccades and voluntary (internally 
triggered) saccades. The contribution of the medio-posterior part of the 
cerebellum to reactive saccades adaptation has been clearly demonstrated, but 
the evidence that other parts of the cerebellum are also involved is limited. 
Moreover, the cerebellar substrates of voluntary saccades adaptation have only 
been marginally investigated. Here, we addressed these two questions by 
investigating the adaptive capabilities of patients with cerebellar or 
pre-cerebellar stroke. We recruited three groups of patients presenting focal 
lesions located, respectively, in the supero-anterior cerebellum, the 
infero-posterior cerebellum and the lateral medulla (leading to a Wallenberg 
syndrome including motor dysfunctions similar to those resulting from lesion of 
the medio-posterior cerebellum). Adaptations of reactive saccades and of 
voluntary saccades were tested during separate sessions in all patients and in a 
group of healthy participants. The functional lesion of the medio-posterior 
cerebellum in Wallenberg syndrome strongly impaired the adaptation of both 
reactive and voluntary saccades. In contrast, patients with lesion in the 
supero-anterior part of the cerebellum presented a specific adaptation deficit 
of voluntary saccades. Finally, patients with an infero-posterior cerebellar 
lesion showed mild adaptation deficits. We conclude that the medio-posterior 
cerebellum is critical for the adaptation of both saccade categories, whereas 
the supero-anterior cerebellum is specifically involved in the adaptation of 
voluntary saccades.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-013-3662-6
PMID: 23963603 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


121. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e32560. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032560. Epub 2012 Apr 2.

Contribution of cerebellar sensorimotor adaptation to hippocampal spatial 
memory.

Passot JB(1), Sheynikhovich D, Duvelle É, Arleo A.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neurobiology of Adaptive Processes, UMR 7102, CNRS - University 
Pierre and Marie Curie, Paris, France.

Complementing its primary role in motor control, cerebellar learning has also a 
bottom-up influence on cognitive functions, where high-level representations 
build up from elementary sensorimotor memories. In this paper we examine the 
cerebellar contribution to both procedural and declarative components of spatial 
cognition. To do so, we model a functional interplay between the cerebellum and 
the hippocampal formation during goal-oriented navigation. We reinterpret and 
complete existing genetic behavioural observations by means of quantitative 
accounts that cross-link synaptic plasticity mechanisms, single cell and 
population coding properties, and behavioural responses. In contrast to earlier 
hypotheses positing only a purely procedural impact of cerebellar adaptation 
deficits, our results suggest a cerebellar involvement in high-level aspects of 
behaviour. In particular, we propose that cerebellar learning mechanisms may 
influence hippocampal place fields, by contributing to the path integration 
process. Our simulations predict differences in place-cell discharge properties 
between normal mice and L7-PKCI mutant mice lacking long-term depression at 
cerebellar parallel fibre-Purkinje cell synapses. On the behavioural level, 
these results suggest that, by influencing the accuracy of hippocampal spatial 
codes, cerebellar deficits may impact the exploration-exploitation balance 
during spatial navigation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032560
PMCID: PMC3317659
PMID: 22485133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


122. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2011 Oct;82(10):1103-6. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.2010.232793. Epub 2011 Mar 8.

Impaired saccadic adaptation in DYT11 dystonia.

Hubsch C(1), Vidailhet M, Rivaud-Péchoux S, Pouget P, Brochard V, Degos B, 
Pélisson D, Golmard JL, Gaymard B, Roze E.

Author information:
(1)Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Department 
of Neurology, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: Recent neuroimaging studies point to a possible pathophysiological 
role of cerebellar dysfunction in dystonia. The authors investigated the 
association between sensorimotor adaptation, cerebellar dysfunction and the 
myoclonus-dystonia phenotype.
METHODS: The authors prospectively analysed reactive saccade adaptation in a 
genetically homogeneous group of 14 patients with DYT11 dystonia owing to a 
mutation of the SGCE gene. The authors used a backward reactive saccade 
adaptation task, a well-characterised experimental oculomotor paradigm involving 
the cerebellum. The principle of this paradigm is to simulate a spatial error in 
saccade generation by systematically shifting a visual target during saccade 
execution. Repetition of this systematic error induces a gradual decrease in the 
initial saccade amplitude, reflecting an adaptive phenomenon.
RESULTS: Saccade adaptation was significantly lower in the DYT11 patients than 
in healthy controls (mean value: 8.9%±4.5% vs 21.6%±4.5%; p=8.3×10(-6)). The 
time course of adaptation also differed between the patients and controls 
(p=0.002), reflecting the slower saccadic adaptation in the patients.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides the first neurophysiological evidence of 
cerebellar dysfunction in DYT11 dystonia and supports a role of cerebellar 
dysfunction in the myoclonus-dystonia phenotype.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.2010.232793
PMID: 21386109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Exp Brain Res. 2005 May;163(2):258-60. doi: 10.1007/s00221-005-2231-z. Epub 2005 
Mar 8.

The effect of rest breaks on human sensorimotor adaptation.

Bock O(1), Thomas M, Grigorova V.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Physiology and Anatomy, German Sport University, 50927, Köln, 
Germany. bock@dshs-koeln.de

We have studied the effect of rest breaks on sensorimotor adaptation to rotated 
visual feedback in a pointing task. Adaptive improvement was significantly 
poorer after 1-s breaks than after 5-40-s breaks, with no significant difference 
among the latter break durations. The benefit of >1-s breaks emerged soon after 
the onset of adaptation, and then remained steady throughout the adaptation, 
retention (next day), and persistence (no feedback) phases. This pattern of 
findings indicates that break-induced facilitation is not a result of strategic 
adjustments, motivation, or recovery from fatigue, but rather to consolidation 
of previously acquired sensorimotor recalibration rules.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-005-2231-z
PMID: 15754173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Psychol Res. 2020 Jun;84(4):866-880. doi: 10.1007/s00426-018-1110-8. Epub 2018 
Nov 8.

Individual movement features during prism adaptation correlate with 
after-effects and interlimb transfer.

Renault AG(1), Lefumat H(2)(3), Miall RC(4), Bringoux L(2), Bourdin C(2), 
Vercher JL(2), Sarlegna FR(5).

Author information:
(1)Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, ISM, Marseille, France. alix.renault@univ-amu.fr.
(2)Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, ISM, Marseille, France.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA.
(4)School of Psychology, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
(5)Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, ISM, Marseille, France. 
fabrice.sarlegna@univ-amu.fr.

The human nervous system displays such plasticity that we can adapt our motor 
behavior to various changes in environmental or body properties. However, how 
sensorimotor adaptation generalizes to new situations and new effectors, and 
which factors influence the underlying mechanisms, remains unclear. Here we 
tested the general hypothesis that differences across participants can be 
exploited to uncover what drives interlimb transfer. Twenty healthy adults 
adapted to prismatic glasses while reaching to visual targets with their 
dominant arm. Classic adaptation and generalization across movement directions 
were observed but transfer to the non-dominant arm was not significant and 
inter-individual differences were substantial. Interlimb transfer resulted for 
some participants in a directional shift of non-dominant arm movements that was 
consistent with an encoding of visuomotor adaptation in extrinsic coordinates. 
For some other participants, transfer was consistent with an intrinsic 
coordinate system. Simple and multiple regression analyses showed that a few 
kinematic parameters such as peak acceleration (or peak velocity) and 
variability of movement direction were correlated with interlimb transfer. Low 
peak acceleration and low variability were related to extrinsic transfer, while 
high peak acceleration and high variability were related to intrinsic transfer. 
Motor variability was also positively correlated with the magnitude of the 
after-effect systematically observed on the dominant arm. Overall, these 
findings on unconstrained movements support the idea that individual movement 
features could be linked to the sensorimotor adaptation and its generalization. 
The study also suggests that distinct movement characteristics may be related to 
different coordinate frames of action representations in the nervous system.

DOI: 10.1007/s00426-018-1110-8
PMID: 30406829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Exp Brain Res. 2016 Jun;234(6):1491-504. doi: 10.1007/s00221-016-4559-y. Epub 
2016 Jan 28.

Interference between adaptation to double steps and adaptation to rotated 
feedback in spite of differences in directional selectivity.

Schmitz G(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Sports Science, Leibniz University Hannover, Am Moritzwinkel 6, 
30167, Hannover, Germany. gerd.schmitz@sportwiss.uni-hannover.de.

Two key features of sensorimotor adaptation are the directional selectivity of 
adaptive changes and the interference of adaptations to opposite directions. The 
present study investigated whether directional selectivity and interference of 
adaptation are related to executive functions and whether these phenomena differ 
between two methods for visuomotor adaptation. Subjects adapted at three target 
directions to clockwise or counterclockwise rotated feedback or to clockwise or 
counterclockwise target displacements (double steps). Both adaptation methods 
induce rotations of movement trajectories into the same direction, but provide 
visual information differently. The results showed that adaptation progressed 
differently between three targets. When movements adapted clockwise, adaptation 
was best at the most clockwise located target, and when movements adapted 
counterclockwise, it was best at the most counterclockwise located target, 
suggesting that spatial generalization between target directions is related to 
the direction of motor adaptation. The two adaptation methods produced different 
adaptation patterns, which indicate a further impact of visual information. A 
second adaptation to the other and opposite-directed discordance was worse than 
naive adaptation and washed out the aftereffects from the first adaptation, 
confirming that both adaptation methods interfered. Executive functions were 
significant covariate for overall interference and interference of 
target-specific adaptation. The results suggest that directional selectivity of 
adaptation is shaped by the direction of motor adaptation and the visual 
information provided. The interference of both adaptation methods indicates that 
they share adaptive mechanisms for recalibration. The interference is the lower 
the better subjects are able to cognitively switch between tasks and to inhibit 
prepotent responses. Therefore, cognitive functions seem to be involved in the 
inhibition of non-adequate sensorimotor responses.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-016-4559-y
PMID: 26821312 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Eur J Neurosci. 2021 Feb;53(4):1107-1123. doi: 10.1111/ejn.15034. Epub 2020 Nov 
22.

Martial arts training is related to implicit intermanual transfer of visuomotor 
adaptation.

Werner S(1)(2), Hasegawa K(3), Kanosue K(3), Strüder HK(2), Göb T(2), Vogt 
T(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Professional Sport Education and Sport Qualifications, German 
Sport University, Cologne, Germany.
(2)Institute of Movement and Neurosciences, German Sport University, Cologne, 
Germany.
(3)Faculty of Sport Sciences, Waseda University, Tokorozawa, Japan.

Recent work identified an explicit and implicit transfer of sensorimotor 
adaptation with one limb to the other, untrained limb. Here, we pursue the idea 
that different individual factors contribute differently to the amount of 
explicit and implicit intermanual transfer. In particular, we tested a group of 
judo athletes who show enhanced right-hemispheric involvement in motor control 
and a group of equally trained athletes. After adaptation to a 60° visual 
rotation, we estimated awareness of the perturbation and transfer to the 
untrained, non-dominant left hand in two experiments. We measured the total 
amount of intermanual transfer (explicit plus implicit) by telling the 
participants to repeat what was learned during adaptation, and the amount of 
implicit transfer by instructing the participants to refrain from using what was 
learned and to perform movements as during baseline instead. We found no 
difference between the total intermanual transfer of judokas and running 
experts, with mean absolute transfer values of 42.4° and 47.0°. Implicit 
intermanual transfer was very limited, but larger in judokas than in general 
sports athletes, with mean values of 5.2° and 1.6°. A multiple linear regression 
analysis further revealed that total intermanual transfer, which mainly 
represents the explicit transfer, is related to awareness of the perturbation, 
while implicit intermanual transfer can be predicted by judo training, amount of 
total training, speed of adaptation, and handedness scores. The findings suggest 
that neuronal mechanisms such as hemispheric interactions and functional 
specialization underlying intermanual transfer of motor learning may be applied 
according to individual predisposition.

© 2020 The Authors. European Journal of Neuroscience published by Federation of 
European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ejn.15034
PMID: 33140877


127. J Neurophysiol. 2019 May 1;121(5):1967-1976. doi: 10.1152/jn.00814.2018. Epub 
2019 Apr 3.

Eye movements do not play an important role in the adaptation of hand tracking 
to a visuomotor rotation.

Gouirand N(1), Mathew J(1), Brenner E(2), Danion FR(1).

Author information:
(1)Aix Marseille Université, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, 
Institut de Neurosciences de la Timone , Marseille , France.
(2)Department of Human Movement Sciences, Vrije Universiteit , Amsterdam , The 
Netherlands.

Adapting hand movements to changes in our body or the environment is essential 
for skilled motor behavior. Although eye movements are known to assist hand 
movement control, how eye movements might contribute to the adaptation of hand 
movements remains largely unexplored. To determine to what extent eye movements 
contribute to visuomotor adaptation of hand tracking, participants were asked to 
track a visual target that followed an unpredictable trajectory with a cursor 
using a joystick. During blocks of trials, participants were either allowed to 
look wherever they liked or required to fixate a cross at the center of the 
screen. Eye movements were tracked to ensure gaze fixation as well as to examine 
free gaze behavior. The cursor initially responded normally to the joystick, but 
after several trials, the direction in which it responded was rotated by 90°. 
Although fixating the eyes had a detrimental influence on hand tracking 
performance, participants exhibited a rather similar time course of adaptation 
to rotated visual feedback in the gaze-fixed and gaze-free conditions. More 
importantly, there was extensive transfer of adaptation between the gaze-fixed 
and gaze-free conditions. We conclude that although eye movements are relevant 
for the online control of hand tracking, they do not play an important role in 
the visuomotor adaptation of such tracking. These results suggest that 
participants do not adapt by changing the mapping between eye and hand 
movements, but rather by changing the mapping between hand movements and the 
cursor's motion independently of eye movements. NEW & NOTEWORTHY Eye movements 
assist hand movements in everyday activities, but their contribution to 
visuomotor adaptation remains largely unknown. We compared adaptation of hand 
tracking under free gaze and fixed gaze. Although our results confirm that 
following the target with the eyes increases the accuracy of hand movements, 
they unexpectedly demonstrate that gaze fixation does not hinder adaptation. 
These results suggest that eye movements have distinct contributions for online 
control and visuomotor adaptation of hand movements.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00814.2018
PMID: 30943096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Exp Brain Res. 2014 Apr;232(4):1145-56. doi: 10.1007/s00221-014-3824-1. Epub 
2014 Jan 22.

Neural correlates of adaptation to gradual and to sudden visuomotor distortions 
in humans.

Werner S(1), Schorn CF, Bock O, Theysohn N, Timmann D.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Physiology and Anatomy, German Sport University, Cologne, 
Germany, werner@dshs-koeln.de.

This study aimed at scrutinizing the neural correlates of sensorimotor 
adaptation. Subjects were exposed either to a gradually (group G) or to a 
suddenly introduced perturbation (group S) followed by a test of aftereffects. 
They were also exposed to a control condition equated for their movement errors 
during the adaptation condition. We registered subjects' brain activity by 
functional magnetic resonance imaging. Behavioral data revealed no difference 
between aftereffects in G and S, while imaging data suggest different neural 
correlates. Direct comparison between groups showed more adaptation-related 
activation in left cingulate and inferior frontal as well as right caudate and 
temporal areas in S than in G. In contrast, no neural activity was related more 
to G than to S and no common activations were found for both groups. 
Within-group analyses further revealed right inferior parietal lobe, cerebellar 
and cingulate cortex activity in group S and activation of frontal lobe and left 
cerebellum in group G for a contrast between adaptation condition and baseline. 
Less brain activity was observed when controlled for movement errors: the 
contrast between adaptation and control condition yielded left occipital lobe 
activity in group S, and left posterior dentate nucleus and brainstem activity 
in group G. The present data confirm an involvement of the cerebellar cortex in 
error processing during sudden adaptation, since this activation was found for 
the contrast 'adaptation-baseline' but not for 'adaptation-control.' In 
addition, our data suggest an involvement of deep cerebellar nuclei in the 
adaptation to gradually introduced distortions.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-014-3824-1
PMID: 24449008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


129. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 25;9(9):e107834. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107834. 
eCollection 2014.

A comparison of sensorimotor adaptation in the visual and in the auditory 
modality.

Schmitz G(1), Bock O(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Physiology and Anatomy, German Sport University, Köln, Germany; 
Institute of Sports Science, Leibniz University Hannover, Hannover, Germany.
(2)Institute of Physiology and Anatomy, German Sport University, Köln, Germany.

We compared sensorimotor adaptation in the visual and the auditory modality. 
Subjects pointed to visual targets while receiving direct spatial information 
about fingertip position in the visual modality, or they pointed to visual 
targets while receiving indirect information about fingertip position in the 
visual modality, or they pointed to auditory targets while receiving indirect 
information about fingertip position in the auditory modality. Feedback was 
laterally shifted to induce adaptation, and aftereffects were tested with both 
target modalities and both hands. We found that aftereffects of adaptation were 
smaller when tested with the non-adapted hand, i.e., intermanual transfer was 
incomplete. Furthermore, aftereffects were smaller when tested in the 
non-adapted target modality, i.e., intermodal transfer was incomplete. 
Aftereffects were smaller following adaptation with indirect rather than direct 
feedback, but they were not smaller following adaptation with auditory rather 
than visual targets. From this we conclude that the magnitude of adaptive 
recalibration rather depends on the method of feedback delivery (indirect versus 
direct) than on the modality of feedback (visual versus auditory).

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107834
PMCID: PMC4177875
PMID: 25254660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


130. Front Comput Neurosci. 2013 Jul 15;7:95. doi: 10.3389/fncom.2013.00095. 
eCollection 2013.

Coupling internal cerebellar models enhances online adaptation and supports 
offline consolidation in sensorimotor tasks.

Passot JB(1), Luque NR, Arleo A.

Author information:
(1)Unit of Neurobiology of Adaptive Processes, Centre National de la Recherche 
Scientifique, UPMC University Paris 6, UMR 7102 Paris, France.

The cerebellum is thought to mediate sensorimotor adaptation through the 
acquisition of internal models of the body-environment interaction. These 
representations can be of two types, identified as forward and inverse models. 
The first predicts the sensory consequences of actions, while the second 
provides the correct commands to achieve desired state transitions. In this 
paper, we propose a composite architecture consisting of multiple cerebellar 
internal models to account for the adaptation performance of humans during 
sensorimotor learning. The proposed model takes inspiration from the cerebellar 
microcomplex circuit, and employs spiking neurons to process information. We 
investigate the intrinsic properties of the cerebellar circuitry subserving 
efficient adaptation properties, and we assess the complementary contributions 
of internal representations by simulating our model in a procedural adaptation 
task. Our simulation results suggest that the coupling of internal models 
enhances learning performance significantly (compared with independent forward 
and inverse models), and it allows for the reproduction of human adaptation 
capabilities. Furthermore, we provide a computational explanation for the 
performance improvement observed after one night of sleep in a wide range of 
sensorimotor tasks. We predict that internal model coupling is a necessary 
condition for the offline consolidation of procedural memories.

DOI: 10.3389/fncom.2013.00095
PMCID: PMC3711060
PMID: 23874289


131. Vision Res. 2018 Aug;149:66-76. doi: 10.1016/j.visres.2018.06.006. Epub 2018 Jul 
3.

Adaptation of reflexive fusional vergence is directionally biased.

Erkelens IM(1), Bobier WR(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Waterloo, School of Optometry & Vision Science, 200 Columbia 
St. West, Waterloo, ON, Canada. Electronic address: ierkelen@uwaterloo.ca.
(2)University of Waterloo, School of Optometry & Vision Science, 200 Columbia 
St. West, Waterloo, ON, Canada.

Divergence is known to differ from convergence across a wide range of clinical 
parameters. We have postulated that a limited neural substrate results in 
reduced fusional divergence velocities and subsequently a reduced capacity to 
adapt tonic vergence to uncrossed disparities. We further investigated this 
hypothesis by characterizing the degree of plasticity in reflexive fusional 
vergence to repetitive end-point errors using a disparity-based double-step 
paradigm. 10 adults completed 4 study visits where reflexive fusional 
convergence or divergence was measured (250 Hz infrared oculography) to a 2° 
disparity step and then lengthened or shortened via a repeated double-step 
(2° ± 1.5°). Stimuli were presented dichoptically at 40 cm. Adaptive 
modification of vergence responses was similar between directions for the 
shortening conditions, suggesting a common neural mechanism responds to 
overshooting errors. In comparison, adaptive lengthening of convergence was 
slower, but of equal magnitude, suggesting a second neural mechanism with a 
longer time constant for undershooting errors. Divergence response velocities 
were slower at baseline and did not increase after adaptive lengthening. 
Instead, increases in divergence response amplitudes were a result of increased 
response duration, implying saturation of the reflexive, preprogrammed response. 
Adaptive responses serving to increase or decrease reflexive fusional vergence 
recruitment were asymmetric. Adaptive lengthening of convergence and divergence 
identified further directional asymmetries. The results support the hypothesis 
that the neural substrate underlying divergence is attenuated, resulting in 
reduced reflexive plasticity when compared to convergence. The clinical and 
technological implications of these results are discussed.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.visres.2018.06.006
PMID: 29940192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Eur J Neurosci. 2019 Jan;49(1):120-136. doi: 10.1111/ejn.14266. Epub 2018 Dec 1.

Pushing attention to one side: Force field adaptation alters neural correlates 
of orienting and disengagement of spatial attention.

Reuter EM(1)(2), Mattingley JB(2)(3), Cunnington R(2)(3), Riek S(1), Carroll 
TJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Sensorimotor Performance, School of Human Movement and Nutrition 
Sciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(2)Queensland Brain Institute, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, 
Queensland, Australia.
(3)School of Psychology, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, 
Australia.

Sensorimotor adaptation to wedge prisms can alter the balance of attention 
between left and right space in healthy adults, and improve symptoms of spatial 
neglect after stroke. Here we asked whether the orienting of spatial attention 
to visual stimuli is affected by a different form of sensorimotor adaptation 
that involves physical perturbations of arm movement, rather than distortion of 
visual feedback. Healthy participants performed a cued discrimination task 
before and after they made reaching movements to a central target. A 
velocity-dependent force field pushed the hand aside during each reach, and 
required participants to apply compensatory forces toward the opposite side. We 
used event-related potentials (ERPs) to determine whether electroencephalography 
(EEG) responses reflecting orienting (cue-locked N1) and disengagement 
(target-locked P1) of spatial attention are affected by adaptation to force 
fields. After adaptation, the cue-locked N1 was relatively larger for stimuli 
presented in the hemispace corresponding to the direction of compensatory hand 
force. P1 amplitudes evoked by invalidly cued targets presented on the opposite 
side were reduced. This suggests that force field adaptation boosted attentional 
orienting responses toward the side of hand forces, and impeded attentional 
disengagement from that side, mimicking previously reported effects of prism 
adaptation. Thus, remapping between motor commands and intended movement 
direction is sufficient to bias ERPs, reflecting changes in the orienting of 
spatial attention in the absence of visuo-spatial distortion or 
visuo-proprioceptive mismatch. Findings are relevant to theories of how 
sensorimotor adaptation can modulate attention, and may open new avenues for 
treatment of spatial neglect.

© 2018 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ejn.14266
PMID: 30408253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Neurosci. 2014 Feb 19;34(8):3023-32. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3619-13.2014.

Explicit and implicit contributions to learning in a sensorimotor adaptation 
task.

Taylor JA(1), Krakauer JW, Ivry RB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08544, 
Department of Neurology and Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins 
University, Baltimore, Maryland 21218, and Department of Psychology and Helen 
Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley, California 
94720.

Visuomotor adaptation has been thought to be an implicit process that results 
when a sensory-prediction error signal is used to update a forward model. A 
striking feature of human competence is the ability to receive verbal 
instructions and employ strategies to solve tasks; such explicit processes could 
be used during visuomotor adaptation. Here, we used a novel task design that 
allowed us to obtain continuous verbal reports of aiming direction while 
participants learned a visuomotor rotation. We had two main hypotheses: the 
contribution of explicit learning would be modulated by instruction and the 
contribution of implicit learning would be modulated by the form of error 
feedback. By directly assaying aiming direction, we could identify the time 
course of the explicit component and, via subtraction, isolate the implicit 
component of learning. There were marked differences in the time courses of 
explicit and implicit contributions to learning. Explicit learning, driven by 
target error, was achieved by initially large then smaller explorations of 
aiming direction biased toward the correct solution. In contrast, implicit 
learning, driven by a sensory-prediction error, was slow and monotonic. 
Continuous error feedback reduced the amplitude of explicit learning and 
increased the contribution of implicit learning. The presence of instruction 
slightly increased the rate of initial learning and only had a subtle effect on 
implicit learning. We conclude that visuomotor adaptation, even in the absence 
of instruction, results from the interplay between explicit learning driven by 
target error and implicit learning of a forward model driven by prediction 
error.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3619-13.2014
PMCID: PMC3931506
PMID: 24553942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Neurophysiol. 2017 Nov 1;118(5):2745-2754. doi: 10.1152/jn.00416.2017. Epub 
2017 Aug 16.

Variance in exposed perturbations impairs retention of visuomotor adaptation.

Canaveral CA(1), Danion F(2), Berrigan F(1), Bernier PM(3).

Author information:
(1)Département de kinanthropologie, Faculté des sciences de l'activité physique, 
Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada; and.
(2)Aix-Marseille Université, CNRS, Institut de Neurosciences de la Timone, 
Marseille, France.
(3)Département de kinanthropologie, Faculté des sciences de l'activité physique, 
Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada; and 
pierre-michel.bernier@usherbrooke.ca.

Sensorimotor control requires an accurate estimate of the state of the body. The 
brain optimizes state estimation by combining sensory signals with predictions 
of the sensory consequences of motor commands using a forward model. Given that 
both sensory signals and predictions are uncertain (i.e., noisy), the brain 
optimally weights the relative reliance on each source of information during 
adaptation. In support, it is known that uncertainty in the sensory predictions 
influences the rate and generalization of visuomotor adaptation. We investigated 
whether uncertainty in the sensory predictions affects the retention of a new 
visuomotor relationship. This was done by exposing three separate groups to a 
visuomotor rotation whose mean was common at 15° counterclockwise but whose 
variance around the mean differed (i.e., SD of 0°, 3.2°, or 4.5°). Retention was 
assessed by measuring the persistence of the adapted behavior in a no-vision 
phase. Results revealed that mean reach direction late in adaptation was similar 
across groups, suggesting it depended mainly on the mean of exposed rotations 
and was robust to differences in variance. However, retention differed across 
groups, with higher levels of variance being associated with a more rapid 
reversion toward nonadapted behavior. A control experiment ruled out the 
possibility that differences in retention were accounted for by differences in 
success rates. Exposure to variable rotations may have increased the uncertainty 
in sensory predictions, making the adapted forward model more labile and 
susceptible to change or decay.NEW & NOTEWORTHY The brain predicts the sensory 
consequences of motor commands through a forward model. These predictions are 
subject to uncertainty. We use visuomotor adaptation and modulate uncertainty in 
the sensory predictions by manipulating the variance in exposed rotations. 
Results reveal that variance does not influence the final extent of adaptation 
but selectively impairs the retention of motor memories. These results suggest 
that a more uncertain forward model is more susceptible to change or decay.

Copyright © 2017 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00416.2017
PMCID: PMC5675903
PMID: 28814633 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Neurophysiol. 2015 Jul;114(1):468-73. doi: 10.1152/jn.00298.2015. Epub 2015 
May 27.

Direct-effects and after-effects of visuomotor adaptation with one arm on 
subsequent performance with the other arm.

Wang J(1), Lei Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Kinesiology, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, 
Wisconsin wang34@uwm.edu.
(2)Department of Kinesiology, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, 
Wisconsin.

Adapting to a novel sensorimotor condition is generally thought to result in the 
formation of an internal representation associated with the novel sensorimotor 
transform. While the presence of after-effects following sensorimotor adaptation 
is taken as evidence that such an internal representation was developed as a 
result of adaptation, it remains unclear whether the absence of after-effects 
following sensorimotor adaptation indicates that no internal representation was 
developed. In the present study, we examined this question by having individuals 
adapt to a 30° visual rotation with one arm first and testing 1) how the initial 
adaptation would influence subsequent performance with the other arm under the 
same visual condition (called direct-effects) or under a normal visual condition 
(called after-effects); or 2) how the initial adaptation that occurred at one 
workspace location would influence subsequent performance at another location 
with the same arm under the same or a normal visual condition. Results indicated 
that initial adaptation with one arm significantly influenced subsequent 
performance with the other in terms of direct- but not after-effects and that 
initial adaptation at one workspace location significantly influenced subsequent 
performance at a new location with the same arm in terms of both direct- and 
after-effects, but to different extents. These findings indicate that formation 
of a neural representation associated with a novel visuomotor transform does not 
always result in after-effects and suggest that visuomotor adaptation may 
involve multiple aspects of a neural representation, some of which are effector 
independent and some of which are effector dependent.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00298.2015
PMCID: PMC4509398
PMID: 26019313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Front Hum Neurosci. 2013 Mar 14;7:81. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00081. eCollection 
2013.

Basic principles of sensorimotor adaptation to different distortions with 
different effectors and movement types: a review and synthesis of behavioral 
findings.

Bock O(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Physiology and Anatomy, German Sport University Köln, Germany.

This article reviews seemingly conflicting behavioral data about sensorimotor 
adaptation. Some earlier studies assert that one common mechanism exists for 
multiple distortions, and others that multiple mechanisms exist for one given 
distortion. Some but not others report that adaptation is direction-selective. 
Some submit that adaptation transfers across effectors, and others that a single 
effector can adapt to multiple distortions. A model is proposed to account for 
all these findings. It stipulates that adaptive mechanisms respond to multiple 
distortions, consist of directionally tuned special-purpose modules, can be 
switched in dependence on contextual cues, and are connected to practiced 
movement types with a higher weight than to unpracticed ones.

DOI: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00081
PMCID: PMC3596763
PMID: 23503204


137. Brain Res. 2007 Dec 14;1185:136-51. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2007.09.088. Epub 
2007 Oct 11.

Neural correlates associated with intermanual transfer of sensorimotor 
adaptation.

Anguera JA(1), Russell CA, Noll DC, Seidler RD.

Author information:
(1)Division of Kinesiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2214, 
USA.

Investigations of intermanual transfer of learning have demonstrated that 
individuals can transfer acquired motor skills from one hand to the other. The 
purpose of the current study was to use fMRI to investigate the potential 
overlap of neural regions engaged during learning and at transfer of learning 
from the dominant arm to the non-dominant arm during sensorimotor adaptation. 
Participants performed a visuomotor adaptation joystick task where they adapted 
manual aiming movements to a 30 degrees rotation of the visual feedback display. 
They performed eleven blocks (24 trials/block) of right-hand adaptation before 
performing the task with their left hand (transfer). Participants showed a 
selective transfer of learning effect: prior right-hand practice led to reduced 
endpoint errors but not trajectory errors for the left hand. This is consistent 
with work showing that the right arm is specialized for trajectory control while 
the left is specialized for endpoint control [Sainburg, R.L., 2005. Handedness, 
Differential specializations for control of trajectory and position. Exerc Sport 
Sci Rev 33, 206-213.]. Early adaptation processes were associated with 
activation in frontal and parietal regions, including bilateral dorsal premotor 
cortex. At transfer, activation was seen in the temporal cortex as well as the 
right medial frontal gyrus and the middle occipital gyrus. These regions have 
been observed in other studies during the late phases of sensorimotor 
adaptation. Integrating these data with the existing literature, we suggest that 
the left dorsal premotor cortex contributes to trajectory control, while the 
left visual and temporal cortices contribute to endpoint control.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2007.09.088
PMID: 17996854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Curr Biol. 2002 May 14;12(10):834-7. doi: 10.1016/s0960-9822(02)00836-9.

When feeling is more important than seeing in sensorimotor adaptation.

van Beers RJ(1), Wolpert DM, Haggard P.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, 17 Queen 
Square, WC1N 3AR, London, United Kingdom. r.van-beers@ucl.ac.uk

Perception and action are based on information from multiple sensory modalities. 
For instance, both vision and proprioception provide information about hand 
position, and this information is integrated to generate a single estimate of 
where the hand is in space. Classically, vision has been thought to dominate 
this process, with the estimate of hand position relying more on vision than on 
proprioception. However, an optimal integration model that takes into account 
the precision of vision and proprioception predicts that the weighting of the 
two senses varies with direction and that the classical result should only hold 
for specific spatial directions. Using an adaptation paradigm, we show that, as 
predicted by this model, the visual-proprioceptive integration varies with 
direction. Variation with direction was so strong that, in the depth direction, 
the classical result was reversed: the estimate relies more on proprioception 
than on vision. These results provide evidence for statistically optimal 
integration of information from multiple modalities.

DOI: 10.1016/s0960-9822(02)00836-9
PMID: 12015120 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Front Hum Neurosci. 2016 May 24;10:227. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2016.00227. 
eCollection 2016.

Saccade Adaptation and Visual Uncertainty.

Souto D(1), Gegenfurtner KR(2), Schütz AC(3).

Author information:
(1)Abteilung Allgemeine Psychologie, Justus Liebig Universität GießenGiessen, 
Germany; Department of Neuroscience, Psychology, and Behavior, University of 
LeicesterLeicester, UK.
(2)Abteilung Allgemeine Psychologie, Justus Liebig Universität Gießen Giessen, 
Germany.
(3)Abteilung Allgemeine Psychologie, Justus Liebig Universität GießenGiessen, 
Germany; Allgemeine und Biologische Psychologie, Philipps-Universität 
MarburgMarburg, Germany.

Visual uncertainty may affect saccade adaptation in two complementary ways. 
First, an ideal adaptor should take into account the reliability of visual 
information for determining the amount of correction, predicting that increasing 
visual uncertainty should decrease adaptation rates. We tested this by comparing 
observers' direction discrimination and adaptation rates in an 
intra-saccadic-step paradigm. Second, clearly visible target steps may generate 
a slower adaptation rate since the error can be attributed to an external cause, 
instead of an internal change in the visuo-motor mapping that needs to be 
compensated. We tested this prediction by measuring saccade adaptation to 
different step sizes. Most remarkably, we found little correlation between 
estimates of visual uncertainty and adaptation rates and no slower adaptation 
rates with more visible step sizes. Additionally, we show that for low contrast 
targets backward steps are perceived as stationary after the saccade, but that 
adaptation rates are independent of contrast. We suggest that the saccadic 
system uses different position signals for adapting dysmetric saccades and for 
generating a trans-saccadic stable visual percept, explaining that saccade 
adaptation is found to be independent of visual uncertainty.

DOI: 10.3389/fnhum.2016.00227
PMCID: PMC4877365
PMID: 27252635


140. J Acoust Soc Am. 2021 Feb;149(2):1147. doi: 10.1121/10.0003440.

Speech compensation responses and sensorimotor adaptation to formant feedback 
perturbations.

Raharjo I(1), Kothare H(1), Nagarajan SS(2), Houde JF(3).

Author information:
(1)University of California, Berkeley and University of California, San 
Francisco, Graduate Program in Bioengineering.
(2)Biomagnetic Imaging Laboratory, Department of Radiology and Biomedical 
Imaging, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California 
94143, USA.
(3)Speech Neuroscience Laboratory, Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck 
Surgery, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California 
94143, USA.

Control of speech formants is important for the production of distinguishable 
speech sounds and is achieved with both feedback and learned feedforward 
control. However, it is unclear whether the learning of feedforward control 
involves the mechanisms of feedback control. Speakers have been shown to 
compensate for unpredictable transient mid-utterance perturbations of pitch and 
loudness feedback, demonstrating online feedback control of these speech 
features. To determine whether similar feedback control mechanisms exist in the 
production of formants, responses to unpredictable vowel formant feedback 
perturbations were examined. Results showed similar within-trial compensatory 
responses to formant perturbations that were presented at utterance onset and 
mid-utterance. The relationship between online feedback compensation to 
unpredictable formant perturbations and sensorimotor adaptation to consistent 
formant perturbations was further examined. Within-trial online compensation 
responses were not correlated with across-trial sensorimotor adaptation. A 
detailed analysis of within-trial time course dynamics across trials during 
sensorimotor adaptation revealed that across-trial sensorimotor adaptation 
responses did not result from an incorporation of within-trial compensation 
response. These findings suggest that online feedback compensation and 
sensorimotor adaptation are governed by distinct neural mechanisms. These 
findings have important implications for models of speech motor control in terms 
of how feedback and feedforward control mechanisms are implemented.

DOI: 10.1121/10.0003440
PMCID: PMC7892200
PMID: 33639824


141. Elife. 2019 Apr 29;8:e39882. doi: 10.7554/eLife.39882.

The influence of task outcome on implicit motor learning.

Kim HE(1)(2)(3)(4), Parvin DE(1)(2), Ivry RB(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, 
United States.
(2)Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, United States.
(3)Department of Physical Therapy, University of Delaware, Newark, United 
States.
(4)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Delaware, 
Newark, United States.

Recent studies have demonstrated that task success signals can modulate learning 
during sensorimotor adaptation tasks, primarily through engaging explicit 
processes. Here, we examine the influence of task outcome on implicit 
adaptation, using a reaching task in which adaptation is induced by feedback 
that is not contingent on actual performance. We imposed an invariant 
perturbation (rotation) on the feedback cursor while varying the target size. In 
this way, the cursor either hit or missed the target, with the former producing 
a marked attenuation of implicit motor learning. We explored different 
computational architectures that might account for how task outcome information 
interacts with implicit adaptation. The results fail to support an architecture 
in which adaptation operates in parallel with a model-free operant reinforcement 
process. Rather, task outcome may serve as a gain on implicit adaptation or 
provide a distinct error signal for a second, independent implicit learning 
process.
EDITORIAL NOTE: This article has been through an editorial process in which the 
authors decide how to respond to the issues raised during peer review. The 
Reviewing Editor's assessment is that all the issues have been addressed (see 
decision letter).

© 2019, Kim et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.39882
PMCID: PMC6488295
PMID: 31033439 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: HK, DP No competing interests declared, RI 
Senior editor, eLife


142. Behav Brain Res. 2012 Mar 1;228(1):107-15. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2011.11.040. Epub 
2011 Dec 6.

The effects of working memory resource depletion and training on sensorimotor 
adaptation.

Anguera JA(1), Bernard JA, Jaeggi SM, Buschkuehl M, Benson BL, Jennett S, 
Humfleet J, Reuter-Lorenz PA, Jonides J, Seidler RD.

Author information:
(1)School of Kinesiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

We have recently demonstrated that visuospatial working memory performance 
predicts the rate of motor skill learning, particularly during the early phase 
of visuomotor adaptation. Here, we follow up these correlational findings with 
direct manipulations of working memory resources to determine the impact on 
visuomotor adaptation, a form of motor learning. We conducted two separate 
experiments. In the first one, we used a resource depletion strategy to 
investigate whether the rate of early visuomotor adaptation would be negatively 
affected by fatigue of spatial working memory resources. In the second study, we 
employed a dual n-back task training paradigm that has been shown to result in 
transfer effects [1] over five weeks to determine whether training-related 
improvements would boost the rate of early visuomotor adaptation. The depletion 
of spatial working memory resources negatively affected the rate of early 
visuomotor adaptation. However, enhancing working memory capacity via training 
did not lead to improved rates of visuomotor adaptation, suggesting that working 
memory capacity may not be the factor limiting maximal rate of visuomotor 
adaptation in young adults. These findings are discussed from a resource 
limitation/capacity framework with respect to current views of motor learning.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2011.11.040
PMCID: PMC3264800
PMID: 22155489 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Exp Brain Res. 2007 Apr;178(4):554-9. doi: 10.1007/s00221-007-0925-0. Epub 2007 
Mar 15.

Effects of variable practice and declarative knowledge on sensorimotor 
adaptation to rotated visual feedback.

Werner S(1), Bock O.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Physiology and Anatomy, German Sport University, 50927, Köln, 
Germany.

It has been shown before that sensorimotor adaptation to rotated vision is more 
generalized when subjects point at eight, rather than at four or less targets. 
Here we evaluate whether an even more variable practice has additional benefits. 
One group of subjects pointed at eight targets, and another group executed 
unconstrained arm movements throughout the workspace. We found no advantage of 
the latter group with respect to adaptive progress, persistence of adaptation 
without visual feedback, or transfer of adaptation to a new motor task. We 
therefore concluded that eight targets are sufficient to yield generalized 
adaptation. To determine the role of declarative knowledge for sensorimotor 
adaptation, subjects from both above groups were questioned regarding the nature 
of the distortion after they completed the experiment. We found that correct 
responders showed better adaptive progress, more persistence, but the same 
transfer as incorrect responders. We therefore concluded that the benefit of 
declarative knowledge is task-specific and short-lived, and is therefore 
probably related to strategic control rather than to an adaptive recalibration 
of the sensorimotor system.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-007-0925-0
PMID: 17361424 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Exp Brain Res. 2003 Aug;151(4):557-60. doi: 10.1007/s00221-003-1553-y. Epub 2003 
Jul 11.

Sensorimotor adaptation to visual distortions with different kinematic coupling.

Bock O(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Physiology, German Sport University, 50927, Köln, Germany. 
bock@dshs-koeln.de

We investigated the mechanisms of sensorimotor adaptation by sequentially 
exposing human subjects to different visual distortions. Subjects performed a 
manual tracking task, while the relationship between their actual finger 
movement and its visual feedback was manipulated either by a 
position-to-position (PP), or by a position-to-velocity (PV) transformation. The 
outcome confirmed previous findings, in that adaptation to PP facilitated the 
subsequent adaptation to a second, additional PP. More importantly, our present 
data documented that pre-exposure to PP interferes with the subsequent 
adaptation to PV, and vice versa. Thus, we observed anterograde interference 
between two transformations of common physical nature (i.e., visual), but 
different kinematic coupling. When previous work on sequential adaptation to 
visual and mechanical transformations is reconsidered in light of this finding, 
converging evidence is yielded in favor of a distributed adaptive mechanism, 
where the magnitude of interference between two successive adaptation sessions 
depends on the overlap of the involved neural structures.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-003-1553-y
PMID: 12856094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Behav Brain Sci. 2001 Oct;24(5):939-73; discussion 973-1031. doi: 
10.1017/s0140525x01000115.

A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness.

O'Regan JK(1), Noë A.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Psychologie Expérimentale, Centre National de Recherche 
Scientifique, Université René Descartes, 92774 Boulogne Billancourt, France. 
oregan@ext.jussieu.fr

Many current neurophysiological, psychophysical, and psychological approaches to 
vision rest on the idea that when we see, the brain produces an internal 
representation of the world. The activation of this internal representation is 
assumed to give rise to the experience of seeing. The problem with this kind of 
approach is that it leaves unexplained how the existence of such a detailed 
internal representation might produce visual consciousness. An alternative 
proposal is made here. We propose that seeing is a way of acting. It is a 
particular way of exploring the environment. Activity in internal 
representations does not generate the experience of seeing. The outside world 
serves as its own, external, representation. The experience of seeing occurs 
when the organism masters what we call the governing laws of sensorimotor 
contingency. The advantage of this approach is that it provides a natural and 
principled way of accounting for visual consciousness, and for the differences 
in the perceived quality of sensory experience in the different sensory 
modalities. Several lines of empirical evidence are brought forward in support 
of the theory, in particular: evidence from experiments in sensorimotor 
adaptation, visual "filling in," visual stability despite eye movements, change 
blindness, sensory substitution, and color perception.

DOI: 10.1017/s0140525x01000115
PMID: 12239892 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Hum Mov Sci. 2010 Apr;29(2):172-8. doi: 10.1016/j.humov.2010.02.004. Epub 2010 
Mar 20.

Mechanisms for visuomotor adaptation to left-right reversed vision.

Werner S(1), Bock O.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Physiology and Anatomy, German Sport University, Cologne, 
Germany. werner@dshs-koeln.de <werner@dshs-koeln.de>

Behavioral studies suggest that the adaptation of planar arm movements to 
rotated visual feedback is achieved by the interplay of a gradual process which 
slowly rotates participants' responses by up to +/-90 degrees , and a discrete 
process which changes the responses by means of axis inversion. The processes 
for adaptation to left-right reversed visual feedback are far less well 
understood. To clarify this issue, 12 healthy participants performed pointing 
movements to targets presented in eight different directions, before and during 
exposure to left-right reversed visual feedback. We quantified the direction of 
each response 150ms after movement onset and analyzed the time-course of those 
directions throughout the adaptation phase, separately for different targets. 
For targets along the axis of inversion, we only found an increase of response 
variability, for targets perpendicular to that axis, we observed a discrete 180 
degrees change of response direction, and for diagonal targets, we found a 
discrete 180 degrees change followed by a gradual "backward" shift of 90 degrees 
. The present findings confirm that sensorimotor adaptation is based on discrete 
and gradual processes, that both types of processes can occur concurrently, and 
suggests that those processes can contribute to adaptation in a target-specific 
fashion.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humov.2010.02.004
PMID: 20304517 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Exp Brain Res. 2001 Jun;138(3):359-65. doi: 10.1007/s002210100704.

Conditions for interference versus facilitation during sequential sensorimotor 
adaptation.

Bock O(1), Schneider S, Bloomberg J.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Physiology, German Sport University, 50927 Köln, Germany. 
bock@hrz.dshs-koeln.de

We investigated how sensorimotor adaptation acquired during one experimental 
session influenced the adaptation in a subsequent session. The subjects' task 
was to track a visual target using a joystick-controlled cursor, while the 
relationship between joystick and cursor position was manipulated to introduce a 
sensorimotor discordance. Each subject participated in two sessions, separated 
by a pause of 2 min to 1 month duration. We found that adaptation was achieved 
within minutes, and persisted in the memory for at least a month, with only a 
small decay (experiment A). When the discordances administered in the two 
sessions were in mutual conflict, we found evidence for task interference 
(experiment B). However, when the discordances were independent, we found 
facilitation rather than interference (experiment C); the latter finding could 
not be explained by the use of an "easier" discordance in the second session 
(experiment D). We conclude that interference is due to an incompatibility 
between task requirements, and not to a competition of tasks for short-term 
memory. We further conclude that the ability to adapt to a sensorimotor 
discordance can be improved by practicing with an unrelated discordance.

DOI: 10.1007/s002210100704
PMID: 11460774 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Neurophysiol. 2011 Jun;105(6):2843-51. doi: 10.1152/jn.00002.2011. Epub 2011 
Mar 30.

A spatial explicit strategy reduces error but interferes with sensorimotor 
adaptation.

Benson BL(1), Anguera JA, Seidler RD.

Author information:
(1)School of Kinesiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.

Although sensorimotor adaptation is typically thought of as an implicit form of 
learning, it has been shown that participants who gain explicit awareness of the 
nature of the perturbation during adaptation exhibit more learning than those 
who do not. With rare exceptions, however, explicit awareness is typically 
polled at the end of the study. Here, we provided participants with either an 
explicit spatial strategy or no instructions before learning. Early in learning, 
explicit instructions greatly reduced movement errors but also resulted in 
increased trial-to-trial variability and longer reaction times. Late in 
adaptation, performance was indistinguishable between the explicit and implicit 
groups, but the mechanisms underlying performance improvements remained 
fundamentally different, as revealed by catch trials. The progression of 
implicit recalibration in the explicit group was modulated by the use of an 
explicit strategy: these participants showed a lower level of recalibration as 
well as decreased aftereffects. This phenomenon may be due to the reduced 
magnitude of errors made to the target during adaptation or inhibition of 
implicit learning mechanisms by explicit processing.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00002.2011
PMCID: PMC3118744
PMID: 21451054 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Exp Brain Res. 2006 Mar;169(3):400-6. doi: 10.1007/s00221-005-0153-4. Epub 2005 
Nov 23.

Relationship between sensorimotor adaptation and cognitive functions in younger 
and older subjects.

Bock O(1), Girgenrath M.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Physiology and Anatomy, German Sport University, 50927, Köln, 
Germany. bock@dshs-koeln.de

We investigated whether deficits of adaptive improvement in seniors are related 
to an age-dependent decay of the brain's executive functions. Younger and older 
subjects completed a battery of cognitive tests, and preformed aimed arm 
movements before and during exposure to rotated visual feedback. In accordance 
with previous work, we found that adaptive improvement during exposure was 
degraded in seniors, while the transfer of adaptation to a new motor task was 
not. This pattern of findings confirms that strategic control but not 
sensorimotor recalibration is affected by old age. Using multiple linear 
regression (MLR) to extract separate executive components from our test battery, 
we found that basic response speed and decision-making, but not the inhibition 
of prepotent responses or mental flexibility, were degraded in our older 
subjects. Again using MLR, we found that degraded adaptive improvement in our 
seniors was partly related to the decay of basic response speed and 
decision-making, and partly to age-dependent phenomena not addressed by our 
cognitive-test battery. Finally, we observed that interindividual variability of 
cognition and adaptive improvement was larger in old than in young subjects, 
which could explain why some previous studies found degraded adaptation in 
seniors while others did not.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-005-0153-4
PMID: 16328306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Exp Brain Res. 2019 Nov;237(11):2799-2810. doi: 10.1007/s00221-019-05635-7. Epub 
2019 Aug 23.

A single high-intensity exercise bout during early consolidation does not 
influence retention or relearning of sensorimotor locomotor long-term memories.

Charalambous CC(1)(2), French MA(2)(3), Morton SM(2)(3), Reisman DS(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, New York University School of Medicine, 222 E 41st 
St, 10th Floor, New York, NY, 10017, USA.
(2)Department of Physical Therapy, University of Delaware, 540 South College 
Ave, Newark, DE, 19713, USA.
(3)Biomechanics and Movement Science Program, University of Delaware, 540 South 
College Ave, Newark, DE, 19713, USA.
(4)Department of Physical Therapy, University of Delaware, 540 South College 
Ave, Newark, DE, 19713, USA. dreisman@udel.edu.
(5)Biomechanics and Movement Science Program, University of Delaware, 540 South 
College Ave, Newark, DE, 19713, USA. dreisman@udel.edu.

A single exercise bout has been found to improve the retention of a skill-based 
upper extremity motor task up to a week post-practice. This effect is the 
greatest when exercise intensity is high and exercise is administered 
immediately after motor practice (i.e., early in consolidation). Whether 
exercise can affect other motor learning types (e.g., sensorimotor adaptation) 
and tasks (e.g., walking) is still unclear as previous studies have not 
optimally refined the exercise parameters and long-term retention testing. 
Therefore, we investigated whether a single high-intensity exercise bout during 
early consolidation would improve the long-term retention and relearning of 
sensorimotor adaptation during split-belt treadmill walking. Twenty-six 
neurologically intact adults attended three sessions; sessions 2 and 3 were 
1 day and 7 days after session 1, respectively. Participants were allocated 
either to Rest (REST) or to Exercise (EXE) group. In session 1, all groups 
walked on a split-belt treadmill in a 2:1 speed ratio (1.5:0.75 m/s). Then, half 
of the participants exercised for 5 min (EXE), while the other half rested for 
5 min (REST). A short exercise bout during early consolidation did not improve 
retention or relearning of locomotor memories one or seven days after session 1. 
This result reinforces previous findings that the effect of exercise on motor 
learning may differ between sensorimotor locomotor adaptation and skilled-based 
upper extremity tasks; thus, the utility of exercise as a behavioral booster of 
motor learning may depend on the type of motor learning and task.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-019-05635-7
PMCID: PMC6801096
PMID: 31444538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The 
authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.


151. Optom Vis Sci. 2006 Apr;83(4):242-8. doi: 10.1097/01.opx.0000214298.73085.b5.

Short-term adaptation to vertical yoked prisms.

Huang MA(1), Ciuffreda KJ.

Author information:
(1)SUNY State College of Optometry, Department of Vision Sciences, New York, New 
York 10010, USA.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to investigate short-term adaptation to 
vertical yoked prisms in visually normal subjects as well as to develop 
normative data for future comparative purposes in patients with acquired brain 
injury.
METHODS: A full-body enclosure containing a calibrated laser pointer was used to 
assess egocentric localization (i.e., one's perceived sense of "straight ahead") 
in total darkness. Fourteen visually normal subjects were tested in a 
counterbalanced manner under both experimental (20 pd base-down) and control 
(plano or zero power) test conditions with each test condition lasting 1 hour. A 
rating scale questionnaire was also administered to assess quantitatively 
subjective adaptation to the yoked prisms.
RESULTS: Group mean egocentric localization showed approximately 50% adaptation 
during the 1-hour test period. Subjective adaptation results were similar.
CONCLUSION: The findings suggest that rapid perceptually driven, sensorimotor 
adaptation occurred as assessed both objectively and subjectively in response to 
vertical yoked prisms. These results are similar to those found in other 
experiments involving short-term adaptation to optical rearrangements.

DOI: 10.1097/01.opx.0000214298.73085.b5
PMID: 16614570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Exp Gerontol. 2018 Sep;110:105-117. doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2018.05.020. Epub 2018 
Jun 2.

Greater neural responses to trajectory errors are associated with superior force 
field adaptation in older adults.

Reuter EM(1), Pearcey GEP(2), Carroll TJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Sensorimotor Performance, School of Human Movement and Nutrition 
Sciences, The University of Queensland, Australia. Electronic address: 
e.reuter@uq.edu.au.
(2)Rehabilitation Neuroscience Laboratory, School of Exercise Science, Physical 
and Health Education, University of Victoria, Canada.
(3)Centre for Sensorimotor Performance, School of Human Movement and Nutrition 
Sciences, The University of Queensland, Australia.

Although age-related declines in cognitive, sensory and motor capacities are 
well documented, current evidence is mixed as to whether or not aging impairs 
sensorimotor adaptation to a novel dynamic environment. More importantly, the 
extent to which any deficits in sensorimotor adaptation are due to general 
impairments in neural plasticity, or impairments in the specific processes that 
drive adaptation is unclear. Here we investigated whether there are age-related 
differences in electrophysiological responses to reaching endpoint and 
trajectory errors caused by a novel force field, and whether markers of error 
processing relate to the ability of older adults to adapt their movements. Older 
and young adults (N = 24/group, both sexes) performed 600 reaches to visual 
targets, and received audio-visual feedback about task success or failure after 
each trial. A velocity-dependent curl field pushed the hand to one side during 
each reach. We extracted ERPs time-locked to movement onset [kinematic 
error-related negativity (kERN)], and the presentation of success/failure 
feedback [feedback error-related negativity (fERN)]. At a group level, older 
adults did not differ from young adults in the rate or extent of sensorimotor 
adaptation, but EEG responses to both trajectory errors and task errors were 
reduced in the older group. Most interestingly, the amplitude of the kERN 
correlated with the rate and extent of sensorimotor adaptation in older adults. 
Thus, older adults with an impaired capacity for encoding kinematic trajectory 
errors also have compromised abilities to adapt their movements in a novel 
dynamic environment.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exger.2018.05.020
PMID: 29870754 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Neurosci. 2016 Feb 3;36(5):1516-28. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3204-15.2016.

Post-Movement Beta Activity in Sensorimotor Cortex Indexes Confidence in the 
Estimations from Internal Models.

Tan H(1), Wade C(2), Brown P(3).

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council Brain Network Dynamics Unit at the University of 
Oxford, Oxford OX1 3TH, United Kingdom, and Nuffield Department of Clinical 
Neurosciences, John Radcliffe Hospital, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DU, 
United Kingdom Huiling.tan@ndcn.ox.ac.uk.
(2)Medical Research Council Brain Network Dynamics Unit at the University of 
Oxford, Oxford OX1 3TH, United Kingdom, and.
(3)Medical Research Council Brain Network Dynamics Unit at the University of 
Oxford, Oxford OX1 3TH, United Kingdom, and Nuffield Department of Clinical 
Neurosciences, John Radcliffe Hospital, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DU, 
United Kingdom.

Beta oscillations are a dominant feature of the sensorimotor system. A transient 
and prominent increase in beta oscillations is consistently observed across the 
sensorimotor cortical-basal ganglia network after cessation of voluntary 
movement: the post-movement beta synchronization (PMBS). Current theories about 
the function of the PMBS have been focused on either the closure of motor 
response or the processing of sensory afferance. Computational models of 
sensorimotor control have emphasized the importance of the integration between 
feedforward estimation and sensory feedback, and therefore the putative motor 
and sensory functions of beta oscillations may reciprocally interact with each 
other and in fact be indissociable. Here we show that the amplitude of 
sensorimotor PMBS is modulated by the history of visual feedback of 
task-relevant errors, and negatively correlated with the trial-to-trial 
exploratory adjustment in a sensorimotor adaptation task in young healthy human 
subjects. The PMBS also negatively correlated with the uncertainty associated 
with the feedforward estimation, which was recursively updated in light of new 
sensory feedback, as identified by a Bayesian learning model. These results 
reconcile the two opposing motor and sensory views of the function of PMBS, and 
suggest a unifying theory in which PMBS indexes the confidence in internal 
feedforward estimation in Bayesian sensorimotor integration. Its amplitude 
simultaneously reflects cortical sensory processing and signals the need for 
maintenance or adaptation of the motor output, and if necessary, exploration to 
identify an altered sensorimotor transformation.
SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: For optimal sensorimotor control, sensory feedback and 
feedforward estimation of a movement's sensory consequences should be weighted 
by the inverse of their corresponding uncertainties, which require recursive 
updating in a dynamic environment. We show that post-movement beta activity 
(13-30 Hz) over sensorimotor cortex in young healthy subjects indexes the 
evaluation of uncertainty in feedforward estimation. Our work contributes to the 
understanding of the function of beta oscillations in sensorimotor control, and 
provides further insight into how aberrant beta activity can contribute to the 
pathophysiology of movement disorders.

Copyright © 2016 Tan et al.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3204-15.2016
PMCID: PMC4737767
PMID: 26843635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Exp Brain Res. 2006 Sep;174(1):45-52. doi: 10.1007/s00221-006-0417-7. Epub 2006 
Mar 10.

The contribution of proprioceptive feedback to sensorimotor adaptation.

Pipereit K(1), Bock O, Vercher JL.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Physiology and Anatomy, German Sport University, 50933 Cologne, 
Germany. kpipereit@yahoo.de

It is known that proprioceptive signals from muscles, joints, and skin are 
involved in the execution of aimed arm movements, but their role in the 
acquisition of new motor behaviour is largely unknown. Previous research using 
deafferented patients yielded inconsistent findings: sensorimotor adaptation was 
found to be less, equal, or even better than in controls. The present study uses 
a different approach: we degraded proprioceptive signals in healthy subjects by 
wrist vibration, while leaving them intact in a control group. In order to 
induce sensorimotor adaptation, both groups executed pointing movements under a 
visual (Exp. A) or a mechanical perturbation (Exp. B). We found that adaptation 
to the visual distortion was little affected by vibration, while adaptation to 
the mechanical distortion was substantially impaired. We conclude that 
proprioceptive signals which overtly disagree with visual ones (Exp. A) are not 
used for adaptation, while those which largely agree with visual ones (Exp. B) 
are used to enhance adaptive recalibration. These results indicate that intact 
proprioception is needed for mechanical but not for visual adaptation, which 
implies that the underlying mechanisms are at least partly distinct.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-006-0417-7
PMID: 16528496 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


155. PLoS Biol. 2015 Dec 8;13(12):e1002312. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002312. 
eCollection 2015 Dec.

Neural Substrates Related to Motor Memory with Multiple Timescales in 
Sensorimotor Adaptation.

Kim S(1)(2), Ogawa K(3)(4), Lv J(5), Schweighofer N(6)(7), Imamizu H(3)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles, California, United States of America.
(2)Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, 
United States of America.
(3)Cognitive Mechanisms Laboratories, Advanced Telecommunications Research 
Institute International, Keihanna Science City, Kyoto, Japan.
(4)Department of Psychology, Graduate School of Letters, Hokkaido University, 
Sapporo, Japan.
(5)Data Sciences and Operations Department, Marshall School of Business, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, United States of 
America.
(6)Division of Biokinesiology and Physical Therapy, University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.
(7)EuroMov, Movement to Health Laboratory (M2H), Université Montpellier-1, 
Montpellier, France.
(8)Center for Information and Neural Networks, National Institute of Information 
and Communications Technology and Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan.
(9)Department of Psychology, Graduate School of Humanities and Sociology, The 
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Comment in
    PLoS Biol. 2015 Dec;13(12):e1002313.

Recent computational and behavioral studies suggest that motor adaptation 
results from the update of multiple memories with different timescales. Here, we 
designed a model-based functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) experiment 
in which subjects adapted to two opposing visuomotor rotations. A computational 
model of motor adaptation with multiple memories was fitted to the behavioral 
data to generate time-varying regressors of brain activity. We identified 
regional specificity to timescales: in particular, the activity in the inferior 
parietal region and in the anterior-medial cerebellum was associated with 
memories for intermediate and long timescales, respectively. A sparse singular 
value decomposition analysis of variability in specificities to timescales over 
the brain identified four components, two fast, one middle, and one slow, each 
associated with different brain networks. Finally, a multivariate decoding 
analysis showed that activity patterns in the anterior-medial cerebellum 
progressively represented the two rotations. Our results support the existence 
of brain regions associated with multiple timescales in adaptation and a role of 
the cerebellum in storing multiple internal models.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002312
PMCID: PMC4672877
PMID: 26645916 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


156. Neuroimage. 2012 Jul 16;61(4):1100-12. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.03.037. 
Epub 2012 Mar 17.

Functional activation of the cerebral cortex related to sensorimotor adaptation 
of reactive and voluntary saccades.

Gerardin P(1), Miquée A, Urquizar C, Pélisson D.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U1028, CNRS UMR5292, Lyon Neuroscience Research Center, ImpAct 
(Integrative, Multisensory, Perception, Action and Cognition team), Lyon, 
France. peggy.gerardin@inserm.fr

Potentially dangerous events in the environment evoke automatic ocular 
responses, called reactive saccades. Adaptation processes, which maintain 
saccade accuracy against various events (e.g. growth, aging, neuro-muscular 
lesions), are to date mostly relayed to cerebellar activity. Here we demonstrate 
that adaptation of reactive saccades also involves cerebral cortical areas. 
Moreover, we provide the first identification of the neural substrates of 
adaptation of voluntary saccades, representing the complement to reactive 
saccades for the active exploration of our environment. An fMRI approach was 
designed to isolate adaptation from saccade production: an adaptation condition 
in which the visual target stepped backward 50 ms after saccade termination was 
compared to a control condition where the same target backstep occurred 500 ms 
after saccade termination. Subjects were tested for reactive and voluntary 
saccades in separate sessions. Multi-voxel pattern analyses of fMRI data from 
previously-defined regions of interests (ROIs) significantly discriminated 
between adaptation and control conditions for several ROIs. Some of these areas 
were revealed for adaptation of both saccade categories (cerebellum, frontal 
cortex), whereas others were specifically related to reactive saccades 
(temporo-parietal junction, hMT+/V5) or to voluntary saccades (medial and 
posterior areas of intra-parietal sulcus). These findings critically extend our 
knowledge on brain motor plasticity by showing that saccadic adaptation relies 
on a hitherto unknown contribution of the cerebral cortex.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.03.037
PMID: 22465298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Hum Mov Sci. 2011 Jun;30(3):415-23. doi: 10.1016/j.humov.2010.10.007. Epub 2011 
Jan 21.

Proprioception plays a different role for sensorimotor adaptation to different 
distortions.

Bock O(1), Thomas M.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Physiology and Anatomy, German Sport University, Germany. 
bock@dshs-koeln.de

If proprioceptive feedback is degraded by agonist-antagonist muscle vibration, 
then adaptation to rotated vision remains intact while adaptation to a 
velocity-dependent force field worsens. Here we evaluate whether this 
differential effect of vibration is related to the physical nature of the 
distortion - visual versus mechanical - or to their kinematic coupling to the 
subjects' hand - velocity versus position dependent. Subjects adapted to a 
velocity-dependent visual distortion, to a position-dependent force, or to a 
velocity-dependent force; one half of the subjects adapted with, and the other 
half without agonist-antagonist vibration at the wrist, elbow, and shoulder. We 
found, as before, that vibration slowed down adaptation to a velocity-dependent 
force. However, vibration did not modify adaptation to the other two 
distortions, nor did it influence the aftereffects of any distortion. From this 
we conclude that intact proprioception supports strategic compensatory processes 
when proprioceptive signals agree with visual ones, and provide relevant 
(dynamic) information not available to the visual system.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humov.2010.10.007
PMID: 21256612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Neuropsychologia. 2016 Apr;84:222-34. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2016.02.021. Epub 2016 Feb 27.

Interactive effects of age and multi-gene profile on motor learning and 
sensorimotor adaptation.

Noohi F(1), Boyden NB(2), Kwak Y(3), Humfleet J(4), Müller ML(5), Bohnen NI(6), 
Seidler RD(7).

Author information:
(1)School of Kinesiology, University of Michigan, 1402 Washington Heights, Ann 
Arbor, MI 48109, United States; Department of Psychology, University of 
Michigan, 530 Church Street, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, United States. Electronic 
address: fnoohi@umich.edu.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, 530 Church Street, Ann 
Arbor, MI 48109, United States. Electronic address: boyden@umich.edu.
(3)Neuroscience Program, University of Michigan, 4137 Undergraduate Science 
Building, 204 Washtenaw Avenue, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, United States. Electronic 
address: youngbin@umass.edu.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, 530 Church Street, Ann 
Arbor, MI 48109, United States. Electronic address: jennfleet@gmail.com.
(5)Department of Radiology, University of Michigan, 1500 E. Medical Center 
Drive, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, United States. Electronic address: 
mtmuller@umich.edu.
(6)Department of Radiology, University of Michigan, 1500 E. Medical Center 
Drive, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, United States; Department of Neurology, University 
of Michigan, 1500 E. Medical Center Drive, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, United States; 
Neurology Service and GRECC, VA Ann Arbor Healthcare System, University of 
Michigan, 2215 Fuller Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48105, United States. Electronic 
address: nbohnen@umich.edu.
(7)School of Kinesiology, University of Michigan, 1402 Washington Heights, Ann 
Arbor, MI 48109, United States; Department of Psychology, University of 
Michigan, 530 Church Street, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, United States; Neuroscience 
Program, University of Michigan, 4137 Undergraduate Science Building, 204 
Washtenaw Avenue, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, United States; Institute of Gerontology, 
University of Michigan, 1500 E. Medical Center Drive, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, 
United States. Electronic address: rseidler@umich.edu.

The interactive association of age and dopaminergic polymorphisms on cognitive 
function has been studied extensively. However, there is limited research on 
whether age interacts with the association between genetic polymorphisms and 
motor learning. We examined a group of young and older adults' performance in 
three motor tasks: explicit sequence learning, visuomotor adaptation, and 
grooved pegboard. We assessed whether individuals' motor learning and 
performance were associated with their age and genotypes. We selected three 
genetic polymorphisms: Catechol-O-Methyl Transferase (COMT val158met) and 
Dopamine D2 Receptor (DRD2 G>T), which are involved with dopaminergic 
regulation, and Brain Derived Neurotrophic Factor (BDNF val66met) that modulates 
neuroplasticity and has been shown to interact with dopaminergic genes. Although 
the underlying mechanisms of the function of these three genotypes are 
different, the high performance alleles of each have been linked to better 
learning and performance. We created a composite polygene score based on the 
Number of High Performance Alleles (NHPA) that each individual carried. We found 
several associations between genetic profile, motor performance, and 
sensorimotor adaptation. More importantly, we found that this association varies 
with age, task type, and engagement of implicit versus explicit learning 
processes.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2016.02.021
PMCID: PMC4849282
PMID: 26926580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Front Hum Neurosci. 2018 Dec 19;12:510. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2018.00510. 
eCollection 2018.

An Investigation of Compensation and Adaptation to Auditory Perturbations in 
Individuals With Acquired Apraxia of Speech.

Ballard KJ(1), Halaki M(1), Sowman P(2), Kha A(1), Daliri A(3), Robin DA(4), 
Tourville JA(5), Guenther FH(5).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Sydney, Lidcombe, NSW, Australia.
(2)Department of Cognitive Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia.
(3)Department of Speech and Hearing Science, Arizona State University, Tempe, 
AZ, United States.
(4)Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Interdisciplinary Program 
in Neuroscience and Behavior, University of New Hampshire, Durham, NH, United 
States.
(5)Department of Speech, Language and Hearing Sciences, Boston University, 
Boston, MA, United States.

Two auditory perturbation experiments were used to investigate the integrity of 
neural circuits responsible for speech sensorimotor adaptation in acquired 
apraxia of speech (AOS). This has implications for understanding the nature of 
AOS as well as normal speech motor control. Two experiments were conducted. In 
Experiment 1, compensatory responses to unpredictable fundamental frequency (F0) 
perturbations during vocalization were investigated in healthy older adults and 
adults with acquired AOS plus aphasia. F0 perturbation involved upward and 
downward 100-cent shifts versus no shift, in equal proportion, during 2 s 
vocalizations of the vowel /a/. In Experiment 2, adaptive responses to sustained 
first formant (F1) perturbations during speech were investigated in healthy 
older adults, adults with AOS and adults with aphasia only (APH). The F1 
protocol involved production of the vowel /ε/ in four consonant-vowel words of 
Australian English (pear, bear, care, dare), and one control word with a 
different vowel (paw). An unperturbed Baseline phase was followed by a gradual 
Ramp to a 30% upward F1 shift stimulating a compensatory response, a Hold phase 
where the perturbation was repeatedly presented with alternating blocks of 
masking trials to probe adaptation, and an End phase with masking trials only to 
measure persistence of any adaptation. AOS participants showed normal 
compensation to unexpected F0 perturbations, indicating that auditory feedback 
control of low-level, non-segmental parameters is intact. Furthermore, 
individuals with AOS displayed an adaptive response to sustained F1 
perturbations, but age-matched controls and APH participants did not. These 
findings suggest that older healthy adults may have less plastic motor programs 
that resist modification based on sensory feedback, whereas individuals with AOS 
have less well-established and more malleable motor programs due to damage from 
stroke.

DOI: 10.3389/fnhum.2018.00510
PMCID: PMC6305734
PMID: 30618687


160. J Neurophysiol. 2020 May 1;123(5):1838-1848. doi: 10.1152/jn.00509.2019. Epub 
2020 Apr 1.

Altering attention to split-belt walking increases the generalization of motor 
memories across walking contexts.

Mariscal DM(1)(2), Iturralde PA(1)(2), Torres-Oviedo G(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania.
(2)Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition, University of Pittsburgh, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

Little is known about the impact of attention during motor adaptation tasks on 
how movements adapted in one context generalize to another. We investigated this 
by manipulating subjects' attention to their movements while exposing them to 
split-belt walking (i.e., legs moving at different speeds), which is known to 
induce locomotor adaptation. We hypothesized that reducing subjects' attention 
to their movements by distracting them as they adapted their walking pattern 
would facilitate the generalization of recalibrated movements beyond the 
training environment. We reasoned that awareness of the novel split-belt 
condition could be used to consciously contextualize movements to that 
particular situation. To test this hypothesis, young adults adapted their gait 
on a split-belt treadmill while they observed visual information that either 
distracted them or made them aware of the belt's speed difference. We assessed 
adaptation and aftereffects of spatial and temporal gait features known to adapt 
and generalize differently in different environments. We found that all groups 
adapted similarly by reaching the same steady-state values for all gait 
parameters at the end of the adaptation period. In contrast, both groups with 
altered attention to the split-belts environment (distraction and awareness 
groups) generalized their movements from the treadmill to overground more than 
controls, who walked without altered attention. This was specifically observed 
in the generalization of step time (temporal gait feature), which might be less 
susceptible to online corrections during walking overground. These results 
suggest that altering attention to one's movements during sensorimotor 
adaptation facilitates the generalization of movement recalibration.NEW & 
NOTEWORTHY Little is known about how attention affects the generalization of 
motor recalibration induced by sensorimotor adaptation paradigms. We showed that 
altering attention to movements on a split-belt treadmill led to greater 
adaptation effects in subjects walking overground. Thus our results suggest that 
altering patients' attention to their actions during sensorimotor adaptation 
protocols could lead to greater generalization of corrected movements when 
moving without the training device.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00509.2019
PMID: 32233897


161. Exp Brain Res. 2016 Dec;234(12):3523-3530. doi: 10.1007/s00221-016-4750-1. Epub 
2016 Aug 8.

Vibrotactile cuing revisited to reveal a possible challenge to sensorimotor 
adaptation.

Lee BC(1), Thrasher TA(1)(2), Layne CS(1)(2)(3), Martin BJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health and Human Performance, University of Houston, Houston, 
TX, USA.
(2)Center for Neuromotor and Biomechanics Research, University of Houston, 
Houston, TX, USA.
(3)Center for Neuro-Engineering and Cognitive Science, University of Houston, 
Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Center for Ergonomics, Department of Industrial and Operations Engineering, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. martinbj@umich.edu.

Motor responses to unexpected external perturbations require the adjustment of 
the motor commands driving the ongoing activity. Strategies can be learned with 
practice to compensate for these unpredictable perturbations (e.g., externally 
induced slips and trips). It has been hypothesized that response improvements 
reflect the adaptation of motor commands through updates of an internal model. 
This hypothesis may be nuanced when a pre-existing motor response could be used. 
In that case, since a relatively adequate response is known, only the timing of 
the command needs to be determined. If so, then it could be inferred that the 
timing of movement initiation and the specific sequence of motor commands can be 
dissociated. Previously, we quantified the benefits of cuing vs. learning on 
recovery motor responses resulting from a trip induced by the abrupt stop of one 
side of a split belt treadmill. Trip occurrence was randomized within a series 
of strides. Two groups of young adults participated to two distinct experiments 
(learning, cuing). In the learning experiment, trip recovery improved 
progressively from the 4th to the 8th trial to reach an "adapted response". In 
the cuing experiment, trip recovery was immediate (from 1st trial). Expanding 
from these results, the aim of the present work was to differentiate the 
processes underlying the generation of motor compensation strategies in response 
to an external perturbation under time uncertainty. A supplementary analysis 
revealed that "cued" responses were kinematically similar to the "adapted 
response" and remained invariant regardless of cue lead time (250, 500 ms before 
trip) and application location of the cue (arm, trunk, lower leg). It is posited 
that all responses (cued and non-cued) are the expression of a pre-existing 
motor program derived from life experiences. Here, the cue significantly reduces 
time uncertainty and adaptation consists primarily in resolving time uncertainty 
based on the trial-by-trial learning of the stochastic property of trip 
occurrence in order to reduce the response delay. Hence, response time delay and 
motor program parameters appear to stem from two distinct processes.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-016-4750-1
PMID: 27501732 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Neuropsychologia. 2012 May;50(6):1029-44. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2012.03.018. Epub 2012 Mar 28.

Neglect: a multisensory deficit?

Jacobs S(1), Brozzoli C, Farnè A.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U1028, CNRS UMR5292, Lyon Neuroscience Research Center, ImpAct Team, 
Lyon F-69000, France. stephane.jacobs@inserm.fr

Neglect is a neurological syndrome characterised by a lack of conscious 
perception of events localised in the contralesional side of space. Here, we 
consider the possible multisensory nature of this disorder, critically reviewing 
the literature devoted to multisensory manifestations and processing in neglect. 
Although its most striking manifestations have been observed in the visual 
domain, a number of studies demonstrate that neglect can affect virtually any 
sensory modality, in particular touch and audition. Furthermore, a few recent 
studies have reported a correlation in severity between visual and non-visual 
neglect-related deficits evaluated in the same patients, providing some 
preliminary support for a multisensory conception of neglect. Sensory 
stimulation and sensorimotor adaptation techniques, aimed at alleviating 
neglect, have also been shown to affect several sensory modalities, including 
some that were not directly affected by the intervention. Finally, in some cases 
neglect can bias multisensory interactions known to occur in healthy 
individuals, leading to abnormal behaviour or uncovering multisensory 
compensation mechanisms. This evidence, together with neurophysiological and 
neuroimaging data revealing the multisensory role played by the areas that are 
most commonly damaged in neglect patients, seems to speak in favour of neglect 
as a multisensory disorder. However, since most previous studies were not 
conducted with the specific purpose of systematically investigating the 
multisensory nature of neglect, we conclude that more research is needed to 
appropriately assess this question, and suggest some methodological guidelines 
that we hope will help clarify this issue. At present, the conception of neglect 
as a multisensory disorder remains a promising working hypothesis that may help 
define the pathophysiology of this syndrome.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2012.03.018
PMID: 22465475 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Aviat Space Environ Med. 2013 Jun;84(6):567-72. doi: 10.3357/asem.3529.2013.

Adaptation in locomotor stability, cognition, and metabolic cost during sensory 
discordance.

Peters BT(1), Brady RA, Batson CD, Guined JR, Ploutz-Snyder RJ, Mulavara AP, 
Bloomberg JJ.

Author information:
(1)NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX, USA. brian.peters-1@nasa.gov

BACKGROUND: Locomotor instability may affect planetary extravehicular activities 
during the initial adaptation to the new gravitational environment. The goal of 
this study was to quantify the locomotor, cognitive, and metabolic effects of 
exposure to a discordant sensory environment.
METHODS: A treadmill mounted on a 6-degree-of-freedom motion base was used to 
present 15 healthy subjects with a destabilizing support surface while they 
walked. Dependent measures of locomotor stability, cognitive load, and metabolic 
cost were stride frequency (SF), reaction time (RT), and the volume of oxygen 
consumed (Vo2), respectively. Subjects completed an 8-min baseline walk followed 
by 20 min of walking with a continuous, sinusoidal, laterally oscillating 
support-surface perturbation. Data for minutes 1, 7, 13, and 20 of the 
support-surface perturbation period were compared with the baseline.
RESULTS: SF, RT, and Vo2 were significantly greater during support-surface 
motion than during the baseline walking condition and showed a trend toward 
recovery to baseline levels during the perturbation period. Results demonstrated 
that adaptation to walking in a discordant sensory environment has quantifiable 
and significant costs in SF, RT, and Vo2 as shown by mean increases of 9%, 20%, 
and 4%, respectively, collected during the first minute of exposure. By the 
fourth minute of exposure, mean Vo2 consumption had increased to 20% over its 
baseline.
DISCUSSION: We believe that preflight sensorimotor adaptation training paradigms 
will impart gains in stability and the ability to multitask, and might increase 
productive mission time by extending work time in extravehicular activity suits 
where metabolic expenditure is a limiting factor.

DOI: 10.3357/asem.3529.2013
PMID: 23745284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Neuroscience. 2020 Dec 15;451:79-98. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2020.09.038. 
Epub 2020 Sep 28.

Task Feedback Processing Differs Between Young and Older Adults in Visuomotor 
Rotation Learning Despite Similar Initial Adaptation and Savings.

Reuter EM(1), Leow LA(2), Carroll TJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Sensorimotor Performance, School of Human Movement and Nutrition 
Sciences, The University of Queensland, Australia. Electronic address: 
e.reuter@tum.de.
(2)Centre for Sensorimotor Performance, School of Human Movement and Nutrition 
Sciences, The University of Queensland, Australia.

Ageing has been suggested to affect sensorimotor adaptation by impairing 
explicit strategy use. Here we recorded electrophysiological (EEG) responses 
during visuomotor rotation in both young (n = 24) and older adults (n = 25), to 
investigate the neural processes that underpin putative age-related effects on 
adaptation. We measured the feedback related negativity (FRN) and the P3 in 
response to task-feedback, as electrophysiological markers of task error 
processing and outcome evaluation. The two age groups adapted similarly and 
showed comparable after effects and savings when re-exposed to the same 
perturbation several days after the initial session. Older adults, however, had 
less distinct EEG responses (i.e., reduced FRN amplitudes) to negative and 
positive task feedback. The P3 did not differ between age groups. Both young and 
older adults also showed a sustained late positivity following task feedback. 
Measured at the frontal electrode Fz, this sustained activity was negatively 
associated with both the amount of voluntary disengagement of explicit strategy 
and savings. In conclusion, despite preserved task performance, we find clear 
differences in neural responses to errors in older people, which suggests that 
there is a fundamental decline in this aspect of sensorimotor brain function 
with age.

Copyright © 2020 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2020.09.038
PMID: 33002556


165. Front Hum Neurosci. 2013 Sep 9;7:543. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00543. eCollection 
2013.

Introduction to the special topic: a multidisciplinary approach to motor 
learning and sensorimotor adaptation.

Seidler RD(1), Meehan SK.

Author information:
(1)Psychology, Kinesiology, Neuroscience, Neuromotor Behavior Laboratory, 
University of Michigan Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

DOI: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00543
PMCID: PMC3766816
PMID: 24058338


166. Front Physiol. 2020 Apr 24;11:377. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2020.00377. eCollection 
2020.

Double-Step Paradigm in Microgravity: Preservation of Sensorimotor Flexibility 
in Altered Gravitational Force Field.

Bringoux L(1), Macaluso T(1), Sainton P(1), Chomienne L(1), Buloup F(1), 
Mouchnino L(2), Simoneau M(3)(4), Blouin J(2).

Author information:
(1)Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, ISM, Marseille, France.
(2)Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, LNC, Marseille, France.
(3)Département de Kinésiologie, Faculté de Médecine, Université Laval, Quebec, 
QC, Canada.
(4)Centre Interdisciplinaire de Recherche en Réadaptation et Intégration Sociale 
(CIRRIS) du CIUSSS de la Capitale Nationale, Quebec, QC, Canada.

The way we can correct our ongoing movements to sudden and unforeseen 
perturbations is key to our ability to rapidly adjust our behavior to novel 
environmental demands. Referred to as sensorimotor flexibility, this ability can 
be assessed by the double-step paradigm in which participants must correct their 
ongoing arm movements to reach targets that unexpectedly change location (i.e., 
target jump). While this type of corrections has been demonstrated in 
normogravity in the extent of reasonable spatiotemporal constraints underpinning 
the target jumps, less is known about sensorimotor flexibility in altered 
gravitational force fields. We thus aimed to assess sensorimotor flexibility by 
comparing online arm pointing corrections observed during microgravity episodes 
of parabolic flights with normogravity standards. Seven participants were asked 
to point as fast and as accurately as possible toward one of two visual targets 
with their right index finger. The targets were aligned vertically in the 
mid-sagittal plane and were separated by 10 cm. In 20% of the trials, the 
initially illuminated lower target was switched off at movement onset while the 
upper target was concomitantly switched on prompting participants to change the 
trajectory of their ongoing movements. Results showed that, both in normogravity 
and microgravity, participants successfully performed the pointing task 
including when the target jumped unexpectedly (i.e., comparable success rate). 
Most importantly, no significant difference was found in target jump trials 
regarding arm kinematics between both gravitational environments, neither in 
terms of peak velocity, relative deceleration duration, peak acceleration or 
time to peak acceleration. Using inverse dynamics based on experimental and 
anthropometrical data, we demonstrated that the shoulder torques for 
accelerating and decelerating the vertical arm movements substantially differed 
between microgravity and normogravity. Our data therefore highlight the capacity 
of the central nervous system to perform very fast neuromuscular adjustments 
that are adapted to the gravitational constraints. We discuss our findings by 
considering the contribution of feedforward and feedback mechanisms in the 
online control of arm pointing movements.

Copyright © 2020 Bringoux, Macaluso, Sainton, Chomienne, Buloup, Mouchnino, 
Simoneau and Blouin.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2020.00377
PMCID: PMC7193114
PMID: 32390872


167. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci. 2008 Sep;63(5):P295-300. doi: 
10.1093/geronb/63.5.p295.

Effects of sensorimotor adaptation training on functional mobility in older 
adults.

Buccello-Stout RR(1), Bloomberg JJ, Cohen HS, Whorton EB, Weaver GD, Cromwell 
RL.

Author information:
(1)Division for Flight Analogs, Universities Space Research Association, NASA 
Johnson Space Center, 2101 NASA Parkway, Mail Code SK37, Houston, TX 77058, USA. 
regina.buccello-stout-1@nasa.gov

The goal of this study was to determine if prolonged exposure to 
perceptual-motor mismatch increased adaptability and retention of balance in 
older adults. Sixteen adults, aged 66 to 81 years, were randomized to one of two 
groups: either the control group (n=8) or the experimental group (n=8). Both 
groups first completed six trials of walking an obstacle course. Participants 
then trained twice a week for 4 weeks. In the training, the control group walked 
on a treadmill for 20 minutes while viewing a static visual scene and the 
experimental group walked on a treadmill for 20 minutes while viewing a rotating 
visual scene that provided a perceptual-motor mismatch. Following training, both 
groups were post-tested on the obstacle course. The experimental group moved 
faster through the obstacle course with fewer penalties. This training effect 
was retained for 4 weeks. Exposure to perceptual-motor mismatch induced an 
adaptive training effect that improved balance and locomotor control in older 
adults.

DOI: 10.1093/geronb/63.5.p295
PMID: 18818444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Hum Mov Sci. 2016 Apr;46:23-9. doi: 10.1016/j.humov.2015.11.020. Epub 2015 Dec 
17.

Influence of divergent and convergent thinking on visuomotor adaptation in young 
and older adults.

Simon A(1), Bock O(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Physiology and Anatomy, German Sport University Cologne, Am 
Sportpark Müngersdorf 6, 50933 Cologne, Germany. Electronic address: 
a.simon@dshs-koeln.de.
(2)Institute of Physiology and Anatomy, German Sport University Cologne, Am 
Sportpark Müngersdorf 6, 50933 Cologne, Germany. Electronic address: 
Bock@dshs-koeln.de.

Visuomotor adaptation declines in older age. This has been attributed to 
cognitive impairments. One relevant cognitive function could be creativity, 
since creativity is implicated as mediator of early learning. The present study 
therefore evaluates whether two aspects of creativity, divergent and convergent 
thinking, are differentially involved in the age-dependent decline of visuomotor 
adaptation. In 25 young and 24 older volunteers, divergent thinking was assessed 
by the alternative-uses-task (AUT), convergent thinking by the 
Intelligenz-Struktur-Test-2000 (IST), and sensorimotor-adaptation by a pointing 
task with 60° rotated visual feedback. Young participants outperformed older 
participants in all three tasks. AUT scores were positively associated with 
young but not older participants' adaptive performance, whereas IST scores were 
negatively associated with older but not young participants' adaptive 
performance. This pattern of findings could be attributed to a consistent 
relationship between AUT, IST and adaptation; taking this into account, 
adaptation deficits of older participants were no longer significant. We 
conclude that divergent thinking supports workaround-strategies during 
adaptation, but doesn't influence visuomotor recalibration. Furthermore, the 
decay of divergent thinking in older adults may explain most of age-related 
decline of adaptive strategies. When the age-related decay of divergent thinking 
coincides with well-preserved convergent thinking, adaptation suffers most.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humov.2015.11.020
PMID: 26707677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


169. BMC Neurosci. 2013 Mar 9;14:25. doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-14-25.

Auditory-motor adaptation to frequency-altered auditory feedback occurs when 
participants ignore feedback.

Keough D(1), Hawco C, Jones JA.

Author information:
(1)Psychology Department & Laurier Centre for Cognitive Neuroscience, Wilfrid 
Laurier University, Waterloo, ON N2L 3C5, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Auditory feedback is important for accurate control of voice 
fundamental frequency (F(0)). The purpose of this study was to address whether 
task instructions could influence the compensatory responding and sensorimotor 
adaptation that has been previously found when participants are presented with a 
series of frequency-altered feedback (FAF) trials. Trained singers and musically 
untrained participants (nonsingers) were informed that their auditory feedback 
would be manipulated in pitch while they sang the target vowel [/α /]. 
Participants were instructed to either 'compensate' for, or 'ignore' the changes 
in auditory feedback. Whole utterance auditory feedback manipulations were 
either gradually presented ('ramp') in -2 cent increments down to -100 cents (1 
semitone) or were suddenly ('constant') shifted down by 1 semitone.
RESULTS: Results indicated that singers and nonsingers could not suppress their 
compensatory responses to FAF, nor could they reduce the sensorimotor adaptation 
observed during both the ramp and constant FAF trials.
CONCLUSIONS: Compared to previous research, these data suggest that musical 
training is effective in suppressing compensatory responses only when FAF occurs 
after vocal onset (500-2500 ms). Moreover, our data suggest that compensation 
and adaptation are automatic and are influenced little by conscious control.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2202-14-25
PMCID: PMC3602002
PMID: 23497238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Trends Neurosci. 2017 Aug;40(8):458-468. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2017.06.005. Epub 
2017 Jul 14.

Subcortical Contributions to Motor Speech: Phylogenetic, Developmental, 
Clinical.

Ziegler W(1), Ackermann H(2).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Neuropsychology Research Group, Institute of Phonetics and Speech 
Processing, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, München, Germany. Electronic 
address: wolfram.ziegler@ekn-muenchen.de.
(2)Centre for Neurology - General Neurology, Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain 
Research, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

Vocal learning is an exclusively human trait among primates. However, songbirds 
demonstrate behavioral features resembling human speech learning. Two circuits 
have a preeminent role in this human behavior; namely, the corticostriatal and 
the cerebrocerebellar motor loops. While the striatal contribution can be traced 
back to the avian anterior forebrain pathway (AFP), the sensorimotor adaptation 
functions of the cerebellum appear to be human specific in acoustic 
communication. This review contributes to an ongoing discussion on how birdsong 
translates into human speech. While earlier approaches were focused on higher 
linguistic functions, we place the motor aspects of speaking at center stage. 
Genetic data are brought together with clinical and developmental evidence to 
outline the role of cerebrocerebellar and corticostriatal interactions in human 
speech.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tins.2017.06.005
PMID: 28712469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Neurosci. 2002 Sep 15;22(18):8287-96. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-18-08287.2002.

The long-term resetting of a brainstem pacemaker nucleus by synaptic input: a 
model for sensorimotor adaptation.

Oestreich J(1), Zakon HH.

Author information:
(1)Section of Neurobiology, University of Texas at Austin, Patterson 
Laboratories, Austin, Texas 78712, USA. joestreich@mail.utexas.edu

The cellular mechanisms behind sensorimotor adaptations, such as the adaptation 
to a sustained change in visual inputs by prism goggles in humans, are not 
known. Here we present a novel example of long-term sensorimotor adaptation in a 
well known neuroethological model, the jamming-avoidance response of a weakly 
electric fish. The adaptation is relatively long lasting, up to 9 hr in vivo, 
and is likely to be mediated by NMDA receptors. We demonstrate in a brain slice 
preparation that the pacemaker nucleus is the locus of adaptation and that it 
responds to long-lasting synaptic stimulation with an increase in the 
postsynaptic spike frequency persisting for hours after stimulus termination. 
The mechanism for the neuronal memory behaves as an integrator, and memory 
duration and strength are quantitatively related to the estimated amount of 
synaptic stimulation. This finding is contrary to the idea that neurons respond 
solely to long-lasting synaptic input by turning down their intrinsic 
excitability. We show that this positive feedback at the cellular level actually 
contributes to a negative feedback loop at the organismic level if the entire 
neural circuit and the behavioral link are considered.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-18-08287.2002
PMCID: PMC6758098
PMID: 12223583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Sci Rep. 2018 Feb 26;8(1):3653. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-21545-0.

High motor variability in DYT1 dystonia is associated with impaired visuomotor 
adaptation.

Sadnicka A(1)(2), Stevenson A(3), Bhatia KP(3), Rothwell JC(3), Edwards MJ(4), 
Galea JM(5).

Author information:
(1)Sobell Department for Motor Neuroscience and Movement Disorders, Institute of 
Neurology, University College London, 33 Queen Square, London, WC1N 3BG, UK. 
a.sadnicka@ucl.ac.uk.
(2)Motor Control and Movement Disorder Group, Institute of Molecular and 
Clinical Sciences, St George's University of London, Cranmer Terrace, Tooting, 
London, SW17 0RE, UK. a.sadnicka@ucl.ac.uk.
(3)Sobell Department for Motor Neuroscience and Movement Disorders, Institute of 
Neurology, University College London, 33 Queen Square, London, WC1N 3BG, UK.
(4)Motor Control and Movement Disorder Group, Institute of Molecular and 
Clinical Sciences, St George's University of London, Cranmer Terrace, Tooting, 
London, SW17 0RE, UK.
(5)Galea Lab, School of Psychology, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, B15 
2TT, UK.

For the healthy motor control system, an essential regulatory role is 
maintaining the equilibrium between keeping unwanted motor variability in check 
whilst allowing informative elements of motor variability. Kinematic studies in 
children with generalised dystonia (due to mixed aetiologies) show that 
movements are characterised by increased motor variability. In this study, the 
mechanisms by which high motor variability may influence movement generation in 
dystonia were investigated. Reaching movements in the symptomatic arm of 10 
patients with DYT1 dystonia and 12 age-matched controls were captured using a 
robotic manipulandum and features of motor variability were extracted. Given 
that task-relevant variability and sensorimotor adaptation are related in 
health, markers of variability were then examined for any co-variance with 
performance indicators during an error-based learning visuomotor adaptation 
task. First, we confirmed that motor variability on a trial-by-trial basis was 
selectively increased in the homogenous and prototypical dystonic disorder DYT1 
dystonia. Second, high baseline variability predicted poor performance in the 
subsequent visuomotor adaptation task offering insight into the rules which 
appear to govern dystonic motor control. The potential mechanisms behind 
increased motor variability and its corresponding implications for the 
rehabilitation of patients with DYT1 dystonia are highlighted.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-21545-0
PMCID: PMC5826938
PMID: 29483592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


173. Lang Cogn Neurosci. 2018;33(6):734-749. doi: 10.1080/23273798.2017.1421317. Epub 
2018 Jan 3.

Adaptation in Mandarin tone production with pitch-shifted auditory feedback: 
Influence of tonal contrast requirements.

Feng Y(1), Xiao Y(2), Yan Y(1), Max L(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Acoustics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China.
(2)Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 
100044, China.
(3)Department of Speech and Hearing Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, 
WA 98105-6246, USA.
(4)Haskins Laboratories, New Haven, CT 06511, USA.

We investigated Mandarin speakers' control of lexical tone production with 
F0-perturbed auditory feedback. Subjects produced high level (T1), mid rising 
(T2), low dipping (T3), and high falling (T4) tones in conditions with (a) no 
perturbation, (b) T1 shifted down, (c) T1 shifted down and T3 shifted up, or (d) 
T1 shifted down and T3 shifted up but without producing other tones. Speakers 
and new subjects also completed a tone identification task with unaltered and 
F0-perturbed productions. With only T1 perturbed down, speakers adapted by 
raising F0 relative to no-perturbation. With simultaneous T1 down and T3 up 
perturbations, no T1 adaptation occurred, and T3 adaptation occurred only if T2 
was also produced. Identification accuracy with stimuli representing adapted 
productions was comparable to baseline, but with simulated non-adapted 
productions it was reduced for T2 and T3. Thus, Mandarin speakers' adaptation to 
F0 perturbations is linguistically constrained and serves to maintain tone 
contrast.

DOI: 10.1080/23273798.2017.1421317
PMCID: PMC6097622
PMID: 30128314


174. Front Hum Neurosci. 2016 May 4;10:203. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2016.00203. 
eCollection 2016.

Increased Adaptation Rates and Reduction in Trial-by-Trial Variability in 
Subjects with Cerebral Palsy Following a Multi-session Locomotor Adaptation 
Training.

Mawase F(1), Bar-Haim S(2), Joubran K(2), Rubin L(3), Karniel A(3), Shmuelof 
L(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Ben-Gurion University of the 
NegevBeer-Sheva, Israel; Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 
Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, BaltimoreMD, USA; Zlotowski Center for 
NeuroscienceBeer-Sheva, Israel.
(2)Zlotowski Center for NeuroscienceBeer-Sheva, Israel; Department of Physical 
Therapy, Ben-Gurion University of the NegevBeer-Sheva, Israel.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Ben-Gurion University of the 
NegevBeer-Sheva, Israel; Zlotowski Center for NeuroscienceBeer-Sheva, Israel.
(4)Zlotowski Center for NeuroscienceBeer-Sheva, Israel; Department of Brain and 
Cognitive Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the NegevBeer-Sheva, Israel; 
Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, Ben-Gurion University of the 
NegevBeer-Sheva, Israel.

Cerebral Palsy (CP) results from an insult to the developing brain and is 
associated with deficits in locomotor and manual skills and in sensorimotor 
adaptation. We hypothesized that the poor sensorimotor adaptation in persons 
with CP is related to their high execution variability and does not reflect a 
general impairment in adaptation learning. We studied the interaction between 
performance variability and adaptation deficits using a multi-session locomotor 
adaptation design in persons with CP. Six adolescents with diplegic CP were 
exposed, during a period of 15 weeks, to a repeated split-belt treadmill 
perturbation spread over 30 sessions and were tested again 6 months after the 
end of training. Compared to age-matched healthy controls, subjects with CP 
showed poor adaptation and high execution variability in the first exposure to 
the perturbation. Following training they showed marked reduction in execution 
variability and an increase in learning rates. The reduction in variability and 
the improvement in adaptation were highly correlated in the CP group and were 
retained 6 months after training. Interestingly, despite reducing their 
variability in the washout phase, subjects with CP did not improve learning 
rates during washout phases that were introduced only four times during the 
experiment. Our results suggest that locomotor adaptation in subjects with CP is 
related to their execution variability. Nevertheless, while variability 
reduction is generalized to other locomotor contexts, the development of savings 
requires both reduction in execution variability and multiple exposures to the 
perturbation.

DOI: 10.3389/fnhum.2016.00203
PMCID: PMC4854882
PMID: 27199721


175. J Neurophysiol. 2010 May;103(5):2372-81. doi: 10.1152/jn.00109.2010. Epub 2010 
Feb 24.

Calcium dynamics encode the magnitude of a graded memory underlying sensorimotor 
adaptation.

Dembrow NC(1), Pettit DL, Zakon HH.

Author information:
(1)Center for Learning and Memory, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 
78712-0805, USA. nikolai@mail.clm.utexas.edu

The role of Ca(2+) in the induction of neural correlates of memory has 
frequently been described in binary terms despite the fact that many forms of 
memory are graded in their strength and/or persistence. We find that Ca(2+) 
dynamics encode the magnitude of sensorimotor adaptation of the electromotor 
output in a weakly electric fish. The neural correlate of this memory is a 
synaptically induced Ca(2+)-dependent enhancement of intrinsic excitability of 
neurons responsible for setting the electromotor output. Changes in Ca(2+) 
during induction accurately predict the magnitude of this graded memory over a 
wide range of stimuli. Thus despite operating over a range from seconds to tens 
of minutes, the encoding of graded memory can be mediated by a relatively simple 
cellular mechanism.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00109.2010
PMCID: PMC2867572
PMID: 20181728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Annu Int Conf IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2010;2010:3410-3. doi: 
10.1109/IEMBS.2010.5627927.

Abnormal adaptation in children affected by cerebral palsy to robot generated 
dynamic environment.

Masia L(1), Frascarelli F, Morasso P, Di Rosa G, Petrarca M, Castelli E, Cappa 
P.

Author information:
(1)Robotics Brain and Cognitive Sciences Dept., Italian Institute of Technology, 
Genoa, Italy. lorenzo.masia@iit.it

This paper aims to investigate how robotic devices can be used to understand the 
mechanism of sensorimotor adaptation in pediatric subjects affected by 
hemiparetic cerebral palsy. Previous studies showed how healthy adults, after 
training in presence of a systematic structured disturbing force field, show an 
"after effect" and therefore they highly adapt and compensate the external 
disturbance. An open issue is whether this adaptive capability is preserved or 
disrupted in pediatric impaired subjects when they experience a robot generated 
dynamic environment. Fourteen pediatric Cerebral Palsy subjects (CP group), and 
age-matched control group were exposed to a robot generated speed-dependant 
force field; during familiarization (no forces generated by the robot) the 
movement of the CP subjects were more curved, displaying greater and variable 
directional error; in the force field phase both the groups showed an 
after-effect, but the CP group had a non significant adaptation rate. This 
outcome suggests the CP subjects have reduced ability to learn external force 
and they make greater aiming error because of an inefficient anticipatory 
strategy during visuomotor task.

DOI: 10.1109/IEMBS.2010.5627927
PMID: 21097248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Neurosci. 2005 Nov 23;25(47):10941-51. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0164-05.2005.

Emerging patterns of neuronal responses in supplementary and primary motor areas 
during sensorimotor adaptation.

Paz R(1), Natan C, Boraud T, Bergman H, Vaadia E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Hadassah Medical School, The Hebrew University, 
Jerusalem 91120, Israel. rony@axon.rutgers.edu

Acquisition and retention of sensorimotor skills have been extensively 
investigated psychophysically, but little is known about the underlying neuronal 
mechanisms. Here we examine the evolution of neural activity associated with 
adaptation to new kinematic tasks in two cortical areas: the caudal 
supplementary motor area (SMA proper), and the primary motor cortex (MI). We 
investigate the hypothesis that adaptation starts at premotor areas, i.e., 
higher in the hierarchy of computation, until a stable representation is formed 
in primary areas. In accordance with previous studies, we found that adaptation 
can be characterized by two phases: an early phase that is accompanied by fast 
and substantial reduction of errors, followed by a late phase with slower and 
more moderate improvements in behavior. We used unsupervised clustering to 
separate the activity of the single cells into groups of cells with similar 
response patterns, under the assumption that each such subpopulation forms a 
functional unit. We specifically observed the number of clusters in each 
cortical area during early and late phases of the adaptation and found that the 
number of clusters is higher in the SMA during early phases of adaptation. In 
contrast, a higher number of clusters was observed in MI only during late 
phases. Our results suggest a new approach to analyze responses of large 
populations of neurons and use it to show a hierarchy of dynamic reorganization 
of functional groups during adaptation.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0164-05.2005
PMCID: PMC6725878
PMID: 16306407 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Neurosci. 2006 Mar 22;26(12):3330-4. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3898-05.2006.

The human dorsal premotor cortex generates on-line error corrections during 
sensorimotor adaptation.

Lee JH(1), van Donkelaar P.

Author information:
(1)Behavioral Brian Sciences, School of Psychology, University of Birmingham, 
Birmingham B15 2TT, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    J Neurosci. 2006 May 31;26(22):5861-2.

A number of different sites in the human brain have been shown to play a role in 
sensorimotor adaptation. However, the specific role played by each of these 
structures in the learning process is poorly understood. In the present study, 
the contribution of the dorsal aspect of the premotor cortex was examined by 
disrupting activity at this site using transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) 
while subjects wearing prism goggles pointed at visual targets. This 
manipulation slowed down the rate of adaptation when vision of the hand was 
available throughout the movement and reduced the presence of on-line trajectory 
corrections. This was accompanied by a reduced shift in the felt position of the 
arm. In contrast, TMS did not cause any alteration in the performance of this 
task when vision of the hand was available only at the end of the movement. 
Thus, we infer from this pattern of results that the human dorsal premotor 
cortex contributes to the generation of the visually based on-line error 
corrections that are responsible for the remapping of arm position sense 
underlying sensorimotor adaptation.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3898-05.2006
PMCID: PMC6674112
PMID: 16554483 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Neurophysiol. 2005 Feb;93(2):1104-10. doi: 10.1152/jn.00859.2004. Epub 2004 
Sep 22.

Task-specific sensorimotor adaptation to reversing prisms.

Marotta JJ(1), Keith GP, Crawford JD.

Author information:
(1)York Centre for Vision Research and Canadian Institutes of Health Research 
Group for Action and Perception, Department of Psychology, York University, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. marotta@cc.umanitoba.ca

We tested between three levels of visuospatial adaptation (global map, parallel 
feature modules, and parallel sensorimotor transformations) by training subjects 
to reach and grasp virtual objects viewed through a left-right reversing prism, 
with either visual location or orientation feedback. Even though spatial 
information about the global left-right reversal was present in every training 
session, subjects trained with location feedback reached to the correct location 
but with the wrong (reversed) grasp orientation. Subjects trained with 
orientation feedback showed the opposite pattern. These errors were 
task-specific and not feature-specific; subjects trained to correctly grasp 
visually reversed-oriented bars failed to show knowledge of the reversal when 
asked to point to the end locations of these bars. These results show that 
adaptation to visuospatial distortion--even global reversals--is implemented 
through learning rules that operate on parallel sensorimotor transformations 
(e.g., reach vs. grasp).

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00859.2004
PMID: 15385588 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Neurophysiol. 2009 May;101(5):2263-9. doi: 10.1152/jn.90898.2008. Epub 2009 
Feb 18.

The synergistic organization of muscle recruitment constrains visuomotor 
adaptation.

de Rugy A(1), Hinder MR, Woolley DG, Carson RG.

Author information:
(1)Perception and Motor Systems Laboratory, School of Human Movement Studies, 
Room 424, Building 26, University of Queensland, St Lucia QLD, 4072, Australia. 
aymar@hms.uq.edu.au

Reaching to visual targets engages the nervous system in a series of 
transformations between sensory information and motor commands. That which 
remains to be determined is the extent to which the processes that mediate 
sensorimotor adaptation to novel environments engage neural circuits that 
represent the required movement in joint-based or muscle-based coordinate 
systems. We sought to establish the contribution of these alternative 
representations to the process of visuomotor adaptation. To do so we applied a 
visuomotor rotation during a center-out isometric torque production task that 
involved flexion/extension and supination/pronation at the elbow-joint complex. 
In separate sessions, distinct half-quadrant rotations (i.e., 45 degrees ) were 
applied such that adaptation could be achieved either by only rescaling the 
individual joint torques (i.e., the visual target and torque target remained in 
the same quadrant) or by additionally requiring torque reversal at a 
contributing joint (i.e., the visual target and torque target were in different 
quadrants). Analysis of the time course of directional errors revealed that the 
degree of adaptation was lower (by approximately 20%) when reversals in the 
direction of joint torques were required. It has been established previously 
that in this task space, a transition between supination and pronation requires 
the engagement of a different set of muscle synergists, whereas in a transition 
between flexion and extension no such change is required. The additional 
observation that the initial level of adaptation was lower and the subsequent 
aftereffects were smaller, for trials that involved a pronation-supination 
transition than for those that involved a flexion-extension transition, supports 
the conclusion that the process of adaptation engaged, at least in part, neural 
circuits that represent the required motor output in a muscle-based coordinate 
system.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.90898.2008
PMID: 19225174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Exp Brain Res. 2019 Jul;237(7):1781-1791. doi: 10.1007/s00221-019-05551-w. Epub 
2019 May 2.

Advanced spatial knowledge of target location eliminates age-related differences 
in early sensorimotor learning.

Rajeshkumar L(1), Trewartha KM(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive and Learning Sciences, Michigan Technological 
University, Houghton, MI, 49931, USA.
(2)Department of Cognitive and Learning Sciences, Michigan Technological 
University, Houghton, MI, 49931, USA. kmtrewar@mtu.edu.
(3)Department of Kinesiology and Integrative Physiology, Michigan Technological 
University, Houghton, MI, 49931, USA. kmtrewar@mtu.edu.

Motor learning has been shown to decline in healthy aging, particularly in the 
early stages of acquisition. There is now ample evidence that motor learning 
relies on multiple interacting learning processes that operate on different 
timescales, but the specific cognitive mechanisms that contribute to motor 
learning remain unclear. Working memory resources appear to be particularly 
important during the early stages of motor learning, and declines in early motor 
learning have been associated with working memory performance in older adults. 
We examined whether age differences in the early stages of motor learning could 
be reduced or eliminated by reducing the spatial working memory demands during a 
force-field adaptation task. Groups of younger and older adults made center-out 
reaching movements to spatial targets either in a repeating four-element 
sequence, or in a random order. Participants also performed a battery of 
cognitive tests to further investigate the potential involvement of associative 
memory, spatial working memory, and procedural learning mechanisms in the early 
stage of motor learning. Although all groups adapted their movements equally 
well by the end of the learning phase, older adults only adapted as quickly as 
younger adults in the sequence condition, with the older adults in the random 
group exhibiting slower learning in the earliest stage of motor learning. Across 
all participants, early motor learning performance was correlated with 
recognition memory performance on an associative memory test. Within the younger 
random group, who were able to adapt as quickly as the sequence groups, early 
motor learning performance was also correlated with performance on a test of 
procedural learning. These findings suggest that age differences in early stages 
of motor learning can be eliminated if the spatial working memory demands 
involved in a motor learning task are limited. Moreover, the results suggest 
that multiple cognitive resources may be utilized during the early stage of 
learning, and younger adults may be more flexible than older adults in the 
recruitment of additional cognitive resources to support learning when spatial 
working memory demands are high.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-019-05551-w
PMID: 31049628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


182. IEEE Int Conf Rehabil Robot. 2019 Jun;2019:593-598. doi: 
10.1109/ICORR.2019.8779500.

Balance Control Strategies during Standing in a Locked-Ankle Passive 
Exoskeleton.

Fasola J, Vouga T, Baud R, Bleuler H, Bouri M.

This paper investigates sensorimotor adaptation strategies of sagittal postural 
control in healthy subjects under kinematic constraints. A passive exoskeleton 
named CAPTUR, with locked ankle joints and legs motion restrained to the 
sagittal plane is used to restrict and measure participant's movements. The aim 
is to assess the role of the orientation of the shank and the trunk segments in 
maintaining the body center of mass above its support base, while the ankle 
strategy is inhibited. Five young healthy participants were asked to keep 
standing, while their balance was challenged by five experimental conditions. 
Participants mainly regulated quiet standing balance by flexing/extending the 
knees, in order to affect the shank and feet angles, and move the contact patch 
along the sagittal axis. In this case, the orientation of the trunk segment 
changes synchronously with the shank angle to keep an upright posture. Responses 
to more dramatic excursions of the center of pressure are ensured by changing 
the trunk tilt angle in opposition of phase with the shank angle. These 
observations could be used to implement a bioinspired balance controller for 
such constrained lower-limb exoskeletons.

DOI: 10.1109/ICORR.2019.8779500
PMID: 31374695 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Neurophysiol. 2021 Mar 3. doi: 10.1152/jn.00585.2020. Online ahead of print.

Individual differences in proprioception predict the extent of implicit 
sensorimotor adaptation.

Tsay JS(1), Kim HE(2), Parvin DE(1), Stover AR(3), Ivry RB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, United States.
(2)Department of Physical Therapy, University of Delaware, United States.
(3)Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, United States.

Recent studies have revealed an upper bound in motor adaptation, beyond which 
other learning systems may be recruited. The factors determining this upper 
bound are poorly understood. The multisensory integration hypothesis states that 
this limit arises from opposing responses to visual and proprioceptive feedback. 
As individuals adapt to a visual perturbation, they experience an increasing 
proprioceptive error in the opposite direction, and the upper bound is the point 
where these two error signals reach an equilibrium. Assuming that visual and 
proprioceptive feedback are weighted according to their variability, there 
should be a correlation between proprioceptive variability and the limits of 
adaptation. Alternatively, the proprioceptive realignment hypothesis states that 
the upper bound arises when the (visually biased) sensed hand position realigns 
with the expected sensed position (target). When a visuo-proprioceptive 
discrepancy is introduced, the sensed hand position is biased towards the visual 
cursor, and the adaptive system counteracts this discrepancy by driving the hand 
away from the target. This hypothesis predicts a correlation between the size of 
the proprioceptive shift and the upper bound of adaptation. We tested these two 
hypotheses by considering natural variation in proprioception and motor 
adaptation across individuals. We observed a modest, yet reliable correlation 
between the upper bound of adaptation with both proprioceptive measures 
(variability and shift). While these results do not favor one hypothesis over 
the other, they underscore the critical role of proprioception in sensorimotor 
adaptation, and moreover, motivate a novel perspective on how these 
proprioceptive constraints drive implicit changes in motor behavior.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00585.2020
PMID: 33656948


184. Neuroimage. 2019 Jan 1;184:10-24. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.09.013. Epub 
2018 Sep 7.

Error-related modulations of the sensorimotor post-movement and foreperiod 
beta-band activities arise from distinct neural substrates and do not reflect 
efferent signal processing.

Alayrangues J(1), Torrecillos F(2), Jahani A(1), Malfait N(3).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Neurosciences de la Timone, UMR7289, Aix-Marseille 
Université/CNRS, Marseille, France.
(2)Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, John Radcliffe Hospital, 
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(3)Institut de Neurosciences de la Timone, UMR7289, Aix-Marseille 
Université/CNRS, Marseille, France. Electronic address: 
nicole.malfait@univ-amu.fr.

While beta activity has been extensively studied in relation to voluntary 
movement, its role in sensorimotor adaptation remains largely uncertain. 
Recently, it has been shown that the post-movement beta rebound as well as beta 
activity during movement-preparation are modulated by movement errors. However, 
there are critical functional differences between pre- and post-movement beta 
activities. Here, we addressed two related open questions. Do the pre- and 
post-movement error-related modulations arise from distinct neural substrates? 
Do these modulations relate to efferent signals shaping muscle-activation 
patterns or do they reflect integration of sensory information, intervening 
upstream of the motor output? For this purpose, first we exploited independent 
component analysis (ICA) which revealed a double dissociation suggesting that 
distinct neural substrates are recruited in error-related beta-power modulations 
observed before and after movement. Second, we compared error-related beta 
oscillation responses observed in two bimanual reaching tasks involving similar 
movements but different interlimb coordination, and in which the same mechanical 
perturbations induced different behavioral adaptive responses. While the task 
difference was not reflected in the post-movement beta rebound, the pre-movement 
beta activity was differently modulated according to the interlimb coordination. 
Critically, we show an uncoupling between the behavioral and the 
electrophysiological responses during the movement preparation phase, which 
demonstrates that the error-related modulation of the foreperiod beta activity 
does not reflect changes in the motor output from primary motor cortex. It seems 
instead to relate to higher level processing of sensory afferents, essential for 
sensorimotor adaptation.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.09.013
PMID: 30201465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Nat Hum Behav. 2021 Feb 4. doi: 10.1038/s41562-020-01036-x. Online ahead of 
print.

An implicit memory of errors limits human sensorimotor adaptation.

Albert ST(1), Jang J(2), Sheahan HR(3), Teunissen L(4), Vandevoorde K(5)(6), 
Herzfeld DJ(2)(7), Shadmehr R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA. salbert8@jhmi.edu.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(4)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University, 
Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(5)Leuven Brain Institute, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(6)Movement Control and Neuroplasticity Research Group, Department of Movement 
Sciences, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(7)Department of Neurobiology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC, 
USA.

During extended motor adaptation, learning appears to saturate despite 
persistence of residual errors. This adaptation limit is not fixed but varies 
with perturbation variance; when variance is high, residual errors become 
larger. These changes in total adaptation could relate to either implicit or 
explicit learning systems. Here, we found that when adaptation relied solely on 
the explicit system, residual errors disappeared and learning was unaltered by 
perturbation variability. In contrast, when learning depended entirely, or in 
part, on implicit learning, residual errors reappeared. Total implicit 
adaptation decreased in the high-variance environment due to changes in error 
sensitivity, not in forgetting. These observations suggest a model in which the 
implicit system becomes more sensitive to errors when they occur in a consistent 
direction. Thus, residual errors in motor adaptation are at least in part caused 
by an implicit learning system that modulates its error sensitivity in response 
to the consistency of past errors.

DOI: 10.1038/s41562-020-01036-x
PMID: 33542527


186. Exp Brain Res. 2016 Feb;234(2):511-22. doi: 10.1007/s00221-015-4484-5. Epub 2015 
Nov 2.

Optic flow improves adaptability of spatiotemporal characteristics during 
split-belt locomotor adaptation with tactile stimulation.

Eikema DJ(1), Chien JH(1), Stergiou N(1)(2), Myers SA(1), Scott-Pandorf MM(3), 
Bloomberg JJ(4), Mukherjee M(5).

Author information:
(1)Biomechanics Research Building, University of Nebraska at Omaha, Omaha, NE, 
68182-0214, USA.
(2)Department of Environmental, Agricultural and Occupational Health, College of 
Public Health, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.
(3)Wyle Science, Technology and Engineering, NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, 
TX, USA.
(4)Neuroscience Laboratories, NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(5)Biomechanics Research Building, University of Nebraska at Omaha, Omaha, NE, 
68182-0214, USA. mmukherjee@unomaha.edu.

Human locomotor adaptation requires feedback and feed-forward control processes 
to maintain an appropriate walking pattern. Adaptation may require the use of 
visual and proprioceptive input to decode altered movement dynamics and generate 
an appropriate response. After a person transfers from an extreme sensory 
environment and back, as astronauts do when they return from spaceflight, the 
prolonged period required for re-adaptation can pose a significant burden. In 
our previous paper, we showed that plantar tactile vibration during a split-belt 
adaptation task did not interfere with the treadmill adaptation however, larger 
overground transfer effects with a slower decay resulted. Such effects, in the 
absence of visual feedback (of motion) and perturbation of tactile feedback, are 
believed to be due to a higher proprioceptive gain because, in the absence of 
relevant external dynamic cues such as optic flow, reliance on body-based cues 
is enhanced during gait tasks through multisensory integration. In this study, 
we therefore investigated the effect of optic flow on tactile-stimulated 
split-belt adaptation as a paradigm to facilitate the sensorimotor adaptation 
process. Twenty healthy young adults, separated into two matched groups, 
participated in the study. All participants performed an overground walking 
trial followed by a split-belt treadmill adaptation protocol. The tactile group 
(TC) received vibratory plantar tactile stimulation only, whereas the virtual 
reality and tactile group (VRT) received an additional concurrent visual 
stimulation: a moving virtual corridor, inducing perceived self-motion. A 
post-treadmill overground trial was performed to determine adaptation transfer. 
Interlimb coordination of spatiotemporal and kinetic variables was quantified 
using symmetry indices and analyzed using repeated-measures ANOVA. Marked 
changes of step length characteristics were observed in both groups during 
split-belt adaptation. Stance and swing time symmetries were similar in the two 
groups, suggesting that temporal parameters are not modified by optic flow. 
However, whereas the TC group displayed significant stance time asymmetries 
during the post-treadmill session, such aftereffects were absent in the VRT 
group. The results indicated that the enhanced transfer resulting from exposure 
to plantar cutaneous vibration during adaptation was alleviated by optic flow 
information. The presence of visual self-motion information may have reduced 
proprioceptive gain during learning. Thus, during overground walking, the 
learned proprioceptive split-belt pattern is more rapidly overridden by visual 
input due to its increased relative gain. The results suggest that when visual 
stimulation is provided during adaptive training, the system acquires the novel 
movement dynamics while maintaining the ability to flexibly adapt to different 
environments.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-015-4484-5
PMCID: PMC4732903
PMID: 26525712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Exp Psychol Hum Percept Perform. 2013 Dec;39(6):1763-74. doi: 
10.1037/a0032123. Epub 2013 Mar 25.

Spatial realignment in sensorimotor adaptation: taking the efficiency into 
account.

Wang L(1), Rand MK, Müsseler J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Work and Cognitive Psychology, RWTH Aachen University.

The present study reviewed the modular approach in adaptive motor control by 
taking cognitive efficiency into account. Three experiments were conducted to 
compare different visuomotor learning mechanisms (modular adaptation, 
use-dependent plasticity, and spatial realignment) in response to visuomotor 
rotations. During exposure, the visual feedback of flicking movements in a 
single-target scenario was rotated either 30° clockwise (CW) or counterclockwise 
(CCW) at the left and right starting locations, respectively. Exposure to the CW 
and CCW rotations was carried out in an alternating order. After adaptation to 
the rotations, generalization was evaluated by assessing aftereffects from a set 
of untrained starting locations to the target (Experiments 1 and 2) or from the 
trained starting locations to a set of new targets (Experiment 3). Predictions 
made based on the different visuomotor learning mechanisms were compared to the 
empirical data. In spite of evidential advantages of modular structure, the 
current work could show a particular case of visuomotor transformation, in which 
modularity lacks efficiency. Results indicate that the adaptive motor control 
system employed the spatial realignment to accomplish adaptation more 
efficiently.

DOI: 10.1037/a0032123
PMID: 23527998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


188. eNeuro. 2020 Mar 26;7(2):ENEURO.0209-19.2020. doi: 10.1523/ENEURO.0209-19.2020. 
Print 2020 Mar/Apr.

Single-Pulse TMS over the Parietal Cortex Does Not Impair Sensorimotor 
Perturbation-Induced Changes in Motor Commands.

Savoie FA(1), Dallaire-Jean L(2), Thénault F(2), Whittingstall K(1)(3), Bernier 
PM(4)(3).

Author information:
(1)Département de médecine nucléaire et radiobiologie, Faculté de médecine et 
des sciences de la santé, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec J1H 5N4, 
Canada.
(2)Département de kinanthropologie, Faculté des sciences de l'activité physique, 
Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec J1K 2R1, Canada.
(3)Centre de Recherche du Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Sherbrooke (CHUS), 
Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec J1H 5N4, Canada.
(4)Département de kinanthropologie, Faculté des sciences de l'activité physique, 
Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec J1K 2R1, Canada 
Pierre-Michel.Bernier@USherbrooke.ca.

Intermittent exposure to a sensorimotor perturbation, such as a visuomotor 
rotation, is known to cause a directional bias on the subsequent movement that 
opposes the previously experienced perturbation. To date, it is unclear whether 
the parietal cortex is causally involved in this postperturbation movement bias. 
In a recent electroencephalogram study, Savoie et al. (2018) observed increased 
parietal activity in response to an intermittent visuomotor perturbation, 
raising the possibility that the parietal cortex could subserve this change in 
motor behavior. The goal of the present study was to causally test this 
hypothesis. Human participants (N = 28) reached toward one of two visual targets 
located on either side of a fixation point, while being pseudorandomly submitted 
to a visuomotor rotation. On half of all rotation trials, single-pulse 
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) was applied over the right (N = 14) or 
left (N = 14) parietal cortex 150 ms after visual feedback provision. To 
determine whether TMS influenced the postperturbation bias, reach direction was 
compared on trials that followed rotation with (RS + 1) and without (R + 1) TMS. 
It was hypothesized that interfering with parietal activity would reduce the 
movement bias following rotated trials. Results revealed a significant and 
robust postrotation directional bias compared with both rotation and null 
rotation trials. Contrary to our hypothesis, however, neither left nor right 
parietal stimulation significantly impacted the postrotation bias. These data 
suggest that the parietal areas targeted here may not be critical for 
perturbation-induced motor output changes to emerge.

Copyright © 2020 Savoie et al.

DOI: 10.1523/ENEURO.0209-19.2020
PMCID: PMC7101479
PMID: 32108021


189. Brain Res Bull. 2006 Oct 16;70(4-6):337-46. doi: 
10.1016/j.brainresbull.2006.06.008. Epub 2006 Jul 7.

Differential effects of age on sequence learning and sensorimotor adaptation.

Seidler RD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, MI 48109-2214, USA. 
rseidler@umich.edu

Although many studies have documented declines in the ability of the elderly to 
learn new manual motor skills, studies have not directly compared the capacity 
of older adults to learn sequences versus adapt to sensorimotor perturbations 
within the context of the same task paradigm, despite differences in the 
underlying neural mechanisms and strategic processes supporting the two types of 
learning. The purpose of the current study was to exploit these task differences 
in an effort to determine whether aging results in a generalized or more 
specific skill learning deficit. Groups of young and older adult subjects 
learned to make a sequence of actions, adapted to one of two visuomotor 
rotations, or adapted to an altered gain of display, all while performing the 
same basic manual joystick aiming task. While the older adults exhibited normal 
sequence learning in comparison to the young adults, they exhibited impairments 
in all three of the adaptation tasks. These deficits in adaptation for the older 
adults were associated with hypometric movements and reduced velocity modulation 
in comparison to that seen in the younger adults. These data suggest that older 
adults may have greater difficulty with learning cerebellar-mediated motor 
skills.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2006.06.008
PMID: 17027769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Hum Mov Sci. 2006 Jun;25(3):310-25. doi: 10.1016/j.humov.2005.12.003. Epub 2006 
Mar 24.

Difference in sensorimotor adaptation to horizontal and vertical mirror 
distortions during ballistic arm movements.

Caselli P(1), Conforto S, Schmid M, Accornero N, D'Alessio T.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Elettronica Applicata, Università degli Studi Roma TRE, Via 
della Vasca Navale, 84-00146 Roma, Italy. caselli@uniroma3.it

When learning a novel motor task, the sensorimotor system must develop new 
strategies to efficiently control the limb(s) involved, and this adaptation 
appears to be developed through the construction of a behavioral map known as an 
'internal model'. A common method to uncover the mechanisms of adaptation and 
reorganization processes is to expose the system to new environmental 
conditions, typically by introducing visual or mechanical distortions. The 
present study investigated the adaptation mechanisms of the human sensorimotor 
system to horizontal and vertical mirror distortions (HMD and VMD) during the 
execution of fast goal-directed arm movements. Mirror distortions (MDs) were 
created by means of virtual visual feedback on a computer screen while the 
movement was executed on a graphics tablet. Twenty healthy adult participants 
were recruited and assigned to one of two groups of 10 people each. Tests were 
divided in two subsequent blocks of five trials. The first block consisted of 
trials with no mirror distortion (NMD), while the second block was recorded when 
exposing one group to HMD and the other to VMD. Both MDs resulted in kinematic 
changes: during the tests with the MDs the participants did not reach the 
performance level found at the NMD test. Motor performance during HMD appeared 
to be globally better than during VMD and the adaptation process to VMD appeared 
to be slower than to HMD, but data interpretation was hampered by large 
within-participant and between-participant variability. In-depth analyses of the 
data revealed that most of the motor performance information was contained in 
the direction of movement. The data supported the idea that the internal model 
for HMD was already partially built.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humov.2005.12.003
PMID: 16563539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Mot Behav. 2007 Jul;39(4):247-58. doi: 10.3200/JMBR.39.4.247-258.

Influence of feedback modality on sensorimotor adaptation: contribution of 
visual, kinesthetic, and verbal cues.

Sarlegna FR(1), Gauthier GM, Blouin J.

Author information:
(1)UMR Mouvement & Perception, CNRS and Université de la Méditerranée, 
Marseille, France.

In 4 studies, the authors tested the contributions of visual, kinesthetic, and 
verbal knowledge of results to the adaptive control of reaching movements toward 
visual targets. The same apparatus was used in all experiments, but the 
procedures differed in the sensory modality of the feedback that participants (N 
s = 5, 5, 6, and 6, respectively, in Experiments 1, 2, 3, and 4) received about 
their performances. Using biased visual, proprioceptive, or verbal feedback, the 
authors introduced a 5 degrees shift in the visuomanual relationship. Results 
showed no significant difference in the final amount of adaptation to the 
mismatch: On average, participants adapted to 79% of the perturbation. That 
finding is consistent with the view that adaptation is a multisensory, highly 
flexible process whose efficiency does not depend on the sensory channel 
conveying the error signal.

DOI: 10.3200/JMBR.39.4.247-258
PMID: 17664168 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Behav Brain Res. 2019 Feb 1;359:701-708. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2018.09.016. Epub 
2018 Sep 21.

The impact of motor impairment on the processing of sensory information.

Klingner CM(1), Brodoehl S(2), Witte OW(3), Guntinas-Lichius O(4), Volk GF(4).

Author information:
(1)Hans Berger Department of Neurology, Jena University Hospital, Germany; 
Biomagnetic Center, University Hospital, Germany; Facial-Nerve-Center, Jena 
University Hospital, Germany. Electronic address: 
carsten.klingner@med.uni-jena.de.
(2)Hans Berger Department of Neurology, Jena University Hospital, Germany; 
Biomagnetic Center, University Hospital, Germany.
(3)Hans Berger Department of Neurology, Jena University Hospital, Germany.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Jena University Hospital, Germany; 
Facial-Nerve-Center, Jena University Hospital, Germany.

Sensorimotor adaptation is driven by mismatch errors between desired movements 
and actual movement outcomes. A mismatch error can be minimized by adjusting 
movements or by altering the interpretation of sensory information. While the 
effect of mismatch errors on the motor system has received much attention, the 
contribution of somatosensory feedback, particularly the sensory-motor interplay 
in the process of adaptation, remains poorly understood. Our study analyzes the 
impact of peripheral deefferentation on the plasticity of the brain networks 
responsible for sensory-motor adaptation, focusing particularly on changes in 
the processing of somatosensory information. For this aim, task-based and 
resting-state functional MRI was performed on 24 patients in the acute state of 
a left-sided idiopathic peripheral facial nerve palsy. The functional 
connectivity of cortical and subcortical networks was analyzed and compared to a 
healthy control group. We found a strong involvement of the somatosensory system 
and the thalamus in the adaptation process following an acute peripheral 
deefferentation. The investigated network shows the principal pattern of a 
reduced connectivity between cortical areas, while the connectivity to 
subcortical areas (the basal ganglia and the thalamus) is increased. We suggest 
that the increased connectivity between the subcortical and cortical structures 
indicates an active sensory-motor adaptation process. We further hypothesize 
that the decreased functional connectivity at the cortical level reflects an 
unsuccessful sensorimotor adaptation process due to the inability to solve the 
somatosensory-motor mismatch. These results extend our understanding of the 
somatosensory-motor interaction in response to a mismatch signal and highlight 
the importance of the thalamus in this process.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2018.09.016
PMID: 30248364 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Vis. 2019 Dec 2;19(14):3. doi: 10.1167/19.14.3.

Depth cue reweighting requires altered correlations with haptic feedback.

Cesanek E(1), Domini F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive, Linguistic, & Psychological Sciences, Brown 
University, Providence, RI, USA.

Depth cue reweighting is a feedback-driven learning process that modifies the 
relative influences of different sources of three-dimensional shape information 
in perceptual judgments and or motor planning. In this study, we investigated 
the mechanism supporting reweighting of stereo and texture information by 
manipulating the haptic feedback obtained during a series of grasping movements. 
At the end of each grasp, the fingers closed down on a physical object that was 
consistent with one of the two cues, depending on the condition. Previous 
studies have shown that this style of visuomotor training leads to cue 
reweighting for perceptual judgments, but the time course has never been 
documented for a single training session, and many questions remain regarding 
the underlying mechanism, such as the pattern of feedback signals required to 
drive reweighting. We address these issues in two experiments, finding 
short-term changes in the motor response consistent with cue reweighting: the 
slope of the grip aperture with respect to the reliable cue increased, whereas 
the slope with respect to the unreliable cue decreased. Critically, Experiment 2 
shows that slope changes do not occur when one of the cues is rendered with a 
constant bias; the grip aperture simply becomes uniformly larger or smaller. Our 
findings support a model of cue reweighting driven by altered correlations 
between haptic feedback and individual cues, rather than simple mismatches, 
which can be resolved by other mechanisms such as sensorimotor adaptation or cue 
recalibration.

DOI: 10.1167/19.14.3
PMID: 31826248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Acoust Soc Am. 2010 Jan;127(1):EL13-8. doi: 10.1121/1.3272633.

Multiple instances of vocal sensorimotor adaptation to frequency-altered 
feedback within a single experimental session.

Hawco CS(1), Jones JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Wilfrid Laurier University, Waterloo, Ontario N2L 
2C5, Canada. hawc2550@wlu.ca

Vocal sensory-motor adaptation is typically studied by introducing a prolonged 
change in auditory feedback. While it may be preferable to perform multiple 
blocks of adaptation within a single experiment, it is possible that a 
carry-over effect from previous blocks of adaptation may affect the results of 
subsequent blocks. Speakers were asked to vocalize an /a/ sound and match a 
target note during ten adaptation blocks. Each block represented a unique 
combination of target note and shift direction. The adaptation response was 
found to be similar for all blocks, indicating that there were no carry-over 
effects from previous blocks of adaptation.

DOI: 10.1121/1.3272633
PMCID: PMC2803716
PMID: 20058941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Exp Brain Res. 2008 Feb;184(4):561-9. doi: 10.1007/s00221-007-1124-8. Epub 2007 
Oct 2.

An fMRI study of brain activation in a visual adaptation task: activation 
limited to sensory guidance.

Girgenrath M(1), Bock O, Seitz RJ.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Physiology and Anatomy, German Sport University, Carl-Diem Weg 
6, 50933 Köln, Germany. girgenrath@dshs-koeln.de

Previous neuroimaging studies yielded different patterns of brain areas 
activated during sensorimotor adaptation, when sensory conflicts are introduced, 
e.g. by manipulating visual information. We propose that possible reasons might 
be the lack to control for adaptation or the change in motor performance. In 
consequence, it was not possible to distinguish between adaptation-related and 
error-related brain activations. We have developed a sensorimotor adaptation 
task which controls for these errors using two types of visual distortion and 
thus is suited to disambiguate sensorimotor adaptation from the related 
activation patterns. Twenty healthy subjects were scanned by fMRI during a 
tracking task, while adapting to a visual distortion, which depended either on 
hand position or on hand velocity. In either case, adaptation was interleaved 
with a control condition, designed such that the time-course of tracking errors 
approximated that under visual distortion. We found that adaptation-related 
neural activation was limited to the left supramarginal and angular gyrus under 
the position-dependent distortion, but extended bilaterally in the supramarginal 
gyrus, as well as in the left middle and right superior frontal gyrus under the 
velocity-dependent distortion. Our findings confirm that equating the errors 
under both conditions will yield an anatomically more restricted activation 
pattern compared with other studies. The additional recruitment in right 
parietal and bilateral frontal areas under the velocity-dependent distortion 
might reflect a higher computational demand, or the involvement of different 
adaptive mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-007-1124-8
PMID: 17909772 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Sci Rep. 2020 Mar 3;10(1):3912. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-60756-2.

Relationships between vocal pitch perception and production: a developmental 
perspective.

Heller Murray ES(1), Stepp CE(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Speech, Language and Hearing Sciences, Boston University, 
Boston, MA, USA. ehmurray@bu.edu.
(2)Department of Speech, Language and Hearing Sciences, Boston University, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, Boston University 
School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA.

The purpose of this study was to examine the relationships between vocal pitch 
discrimination abilities and vocal responses to auditory pitch-shifts. Twenty 
children (6.6-11.7 years) and twenty adults (18-28 years) completed a listening 
task to determine auditory discrimination abilities to vocal fundamental 
frequency (fo) as well as two vocalization tasks in which their perceived fo was 
modulated in real-time. These pitch-shifts were either unexpected, providing 
information on auditory feedback control, or sustained, providing information on 
sensorimotor adaptation. Children were subdivided into two groups based on their 
auditory pitch discrimination abilities; children within two standard deviations 
of the adult group were classified as having adult-like discrimination abilities 
(N = 11), whereas children outside of this range were classified as having less 
sensitive discrimination abilities than adults (N = 9). Children with less 
sensitive auditory pitch discrimination abilities had significantly larger vocal 
response magnitudes to unexpected pitch-shifts and significantly smaller vocal 
response magnitudes to sustained pitch-shifts. Children with less sensitive 
auditory pitch discrimination abilities may rely more on auditory feedback and 
thus may be less adept at updating their stored motor programs.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-60756-2
PMCID: PMC7054315
PMID: 32127585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


197. J Neurosci. 2017 Sep 20;37(38):9197-9206. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3916-16.2017. 
Epub 2017 Aug 18.

Disruption of M1 Activity during Performance Plateau Impairs Consolidation of 
Motor Memories.

Hamel R(1), Trempe M(1)(2), Bernier PM(3).

Author information:
(1)Département de kinanthropologie, Faculté des sciences de l'activité physique, 
Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec J1K 2R1, Canada, and.
(2)Department of Sports Studies, Bishop's University, Sherbrooke, Québec J1M 
1Z7, Canada.
(3)Département de kinanthropologie, Faculté des sciences de l'activité physique, 
Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec J1K 2R1, Canada, and 
pierre-michel.bernier@usherbrooke.ca.

Upon exposure to a new sensorimotor relationship, motor behaviors iteratively 
change early in adaptation but eventually stabilize as adaptation proceeds. 
Behavioral work suggests that motor memory consolidation is initiated upon the 
attainment of asymptotic levels of performance. Separate lines of evidence point 
to a critical role of the primary motor cortex (M1) in consolidation. However, a 
causal relationship between M1 activity during asymptote and consolidation has 
yet to be demonstrated. The present study investigated this issue in male and 
female participants using single-pulse transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) 
to interfere with postmovement activity in M1 in two behavioral phases of a 
ramp-and-hold visuomotor adaptation paradigm. TMS was either provided after each 
trial of the ramp phase of adaptation when a gradual increase in the visuomotor 
rotation caused movements to be changing, or after each trial of the hold phase 
of adaptation when the rotation was held constant and movements tended to 
stabilize. Consolidation was assessed by measuring performance on the same task 
24 h later. Results revealed that TMS did not influence adaptation to the new 
visuomotor relationship in either condition. Critically, however, TMS disruption 
of M1 activity selectively impaired consolidation of motor memories when it was 
provided during the hold phase of adaptation. This effect did not take place 
when TMS was delivered over adjacent dorsal premotor cortex or when motor 
behaviors in late adaptation were prevented from plateauing. Together, these 
data suggest that the impaired consolidation stemmed from interference with 
mechanisms of repetition-dependent plasticity in M1.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT The 
present work demonstrates that TMS disruption of M1 activity impairs the 
consolidation of motor memories selectively when performance reaches asymptotic 
levels during sensorimotor adaptation. These findings provide evidence for a 
causal contribution of M1 to motor memory formation when movements tend to 
repeat, likely through mechanisms of repetition-dependent plasticity.

Copyright © 2017 the authors 0270-6474/17/379197-10$15.00/0.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3916-16.2017
PMCID: PMC6596746
PMID: 28821677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Res Q Exerc Sport. 2020 Sep;91(3):386-393. doi: 10.1080/02701367.2019.1675852. 
Epub 2019 Nov 27.

Procedural and Strategic Visuomotor Learning Deficits in Children With 
Developmental Coordination Disorder.

Gómez-Moya R(1), Diaz R(2), Vaca-Palomares I(2), Fernandez-Ruiz J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Universidad Veracruzana.
(2)Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México.

Purpose: Developmental coordination disorder (DCD) is characterized by poor 
coordination and clumsiness in children. Subjects often show unsteady gait, 
frequent tripping, and difficulty holding objects. Here we evaluated the 
implicit and explicit motor learning capabilities of children with DCD. Method: 
We assessed a total of 80 children (4-12 years old). These children were divided 
into two groups of 40 participants each. One group with DCD diagnosis and a 
control group. Using a prism adaptation paradigm, we evaluated whether DCD 
affects procedural visuomotor adaptation. This adaptation typically occurs 
during the laterally displacing prism adaptation task. We contrasted these 
results with the performance during a reversing prism adaptation task, which 
mainly places demands on strategic visuomotor learning. To solve both adaptation 
tasks, subjects must perform the same movements, but using two completely 
different approaches. Results: There was a significant variable error difference 
between groups, confirming a motor control deficit in individuals with DCD. This 
group also showed significant visuomotor learning deficits in the displacing 
task, including less adaptation and smaller aftereffect. The analysis on the 
reversing task revealed a significant larger number of subjects with DCD that 
could not adapt, suggesting significant strategic visuomotor learning deficits 
in this group too. Conclusions: These results demonstrate procedural and 
strategic visuomotor deficits in this sample of children with DCD.

DOI: 10.1080/02701367.2019.1675852
PMID: 31774375 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Neurophysiol. 2007 Sep;98(3):1392-404. doi: 10.1152/jn.00196.2007. Epub 2007 
Jul 5.

Trial-by-trial transformation of error into sensorimotor adaptation changes with 
environmental dynamics.

Fine MS(1), Thoroughman KA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Washington University, St. Louis, MO 
63130, USA.

Humans can rapidly change their motor output to make goal-directed reaching 
movements in a new environment. Theories that describe this adaptive process 
have long presumed that adaptive steps scale proportionally with error. Here we 
show that while performing a novel reaching task, participants did not adopt a 
fixed learning rule, but instead modified their adaptive response based on the 
statistical properties of the movement environment. We found that as the 
directional bias of the force distribution shifted from strongly biased to 
unbiased, participants transitioned from an adaptive process that scaled 
proportionally with error to one that adapted to the direction, but not 
magnitude, of error. Participants also modified their response as the likelihood 
of the perturbation changed; as the likelihood decreased from 80 to 20% of 
trials, participants adopted an increasingly disproportional strategy. We 
propose that people can rapidly switch between learning processes within minutes 
of experiencing a novel environment.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00196.2007
PMID: 17615136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


200. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 28;9(2):e89953. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089953. 
eCollection 2014.

Acute neuromuscular adaptation at the spinal level following middle cerebral 
artery occlusion-reperfusion in the rat.

Pin-Barre C(1), Laurin J(2), Felix MS(2), Pertici V(2), Kober F(3), Marqueste 
T(2), Matarazzo V(4), Muscatelli-Bossy F(4), Temprado JJ(2), Brisswalter J(5), 
Decherchi P(2).

Author information:
(1)Aix-Marseille Université, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, 
Institut des Sciences du Mouvement, Faculté des Sciences du Sport, Marseille, 
France ; Université de Nice Sophia-Antipolis et Université du Sud Toulon-Var, 
Motricité Humaine Éducation Sport Santé, Nice, France.
(2)Aix-Marseille Université, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, 
Institut des Sciences du Mouvement, Faculté des Sciences du Sport, Marseille, 
France.
(3)Aix-Marseille Université, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, 
Centre de Résonance Magnétique Biologique et Médicale, Faculté de Médecine 
Timone, Marseille, France.
(4)Aix-Marseille Université, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche 
Médicale, Institut de Neurobiologie de la Méditerranée, Marseille, France.
(5)Université de Nice Sophia-Antipolis et Université du Sud Toulon-Var, 
Motricité Humaine Éducation Sport Santé, Nice, France.

The purpose of the study was to highlight the acute motor reflex adaptation and 
to deepen functional deficits following a middle cerebral artery 
occlusion-reperfusion (MCAO-r). Thirty-six Sprague-Dawley rats were included in 
this study. The middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO; 120 min) was performed 
on 16 rats studied at 1 and 7 days, respectively (MCAO-D1 and MCAO-D7, n = 8 for 
each group). The other animals were divided into 3 groups: SHAM-D1 (n = 6), 
SHAM-D7 (n = 6) and Control (n = 8). Rats performed 4 behavioral tests (the 
elevated body swing test, the beam balance test, the ladder-climbing test and 
the forelimb grip force) before the surgery and daily after MCAO-r. H-reflex on 
triceps brachii was measured before and after isometric exercise. Infarction 
size and cerebral edema were respectively assessed by histological (Cresyl 
violet) and MRI measurements at the same time points than H-reflex recordings. 
Animals with cerebral ischemia showed persistent functional deficits during the 
first week post-MCAO-r. H-reflex was not decreased in response to isometric 
exercise one day after the cerebral ischemia contrary to the other groups. The 
motor reflex regulation was recovered 7 days post-MCAO-r. This result reflects 
an acute sensorimotor adaptation at the spinal level after MCAO-r.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089953
PMCID: PMC3938604
PMID: 24587147 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


201. Neuropsychologia. 2012 Aug;50(10):2515-23. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2012.06.024. Epub 2012 Jul 7.

Primary motor cortex involvement in initial learning during visuomotor 
adaptation.

Riek S(1), Hinder MR, Carson RG.

Author information:
(1)The University of Queensland, School of Human Movement Studies, Brisbane, 
QLD, St. Lucia, QLD 4072, Australia. sriek@hms.uq.edu.au

Human motor behaviour is continually modified on the basis of errors between 
desired and actual movement outcomes. It is emerging that the role played by the 
primary motor cortex (M1) in this process is contingent upon a variety of 
factors, including the nature of the task being performed, and the stage of 
learning. Here we used repetitive TMS to test the hypothesis that M1 is 
intimately involved in the initial phase of sensorimotor adaptation. Inhibitory 
theta burst stimulation was applied to M1 prior to a task requiring modification 
of torques generated about the elbow/forearm complex in response to rotations of 
a visual feedback display. Participants were first exposed to a 30° clockwise 
(CW) rotation (Block A), then a 60° counterclockwise rotation (Block B), 
followed immediately by a second block of 30° CW rotation (A2). In the STIM 
condition, participants received 20s of continuous theta burst stimulation 
(cTBS) prior to the initial A Block. In the conventional (CON) condition, no 
stimulation was applied. The overt characteristics of performance in the two 
conditions were essentially equivalent with respect to the errors exhibited upon 
exposure to a new variant of the task. There were however, profound differences 
between the conditions in the latency of response preparation, and the 
excitability of corticospinal projections from M1, which accompanied phases of 
de-adaptation and re-adaptation (during Blocks B and A2). Upon subsequent 
exposure to the A rotation 24h later, the rate of re-adaptation was lower in the 
stimulation condition than that present in the conventional condition. These 
results support the assertion that primary motor cortex assumes a key role in a 
network that mediates adaptation to visuomotor perturbation, and emphasise that 
it is engaged functionally during the early phase of learning.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2012.06.024
PMID: 22781812 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Hum Mov Sci. 2012 Feb;31(1):1-11. doi: 10.1016/j.humov.2011.02.007. Epub 2011 
Jul 20.

Adaptation to mirror-reversed vision is based on directionally tuned modules.

Werner S(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Physiology and Anatomy, German Sport University, Am Sportpark 
Müngersdorf 6, 50933 Köln, Cologne, Germany. werner@dshs-koeln.de

Sensorimotor adaptation to rotated visual feedback is thought to be achieved by 
directionally tuned modules. Here we scrutinize whether adaptation to reversed 
vision utilizes similar mechanisms. Specifically, we hypothesize that adaptive 
transfer to unpracticed target directions is determined by the superposition of 
neighboring modules. One group of subjects adapted to a left-right reversal of 
visual feedback, which requires a 180°, ±90°, or no change of response 
direction, depending on target position. Two groups of control subjects adapted 
to a 180° and to a 90° rotation of visual feedback. We found that adaptation to 
a left-right reversal is less efficient than adaptation to rotations requiring 
the same adaptive change, and attribute this decrement to an overlap of 
neighboring modules. We further found that transfer to unpracticed targets is 
well predicted by a simple Gaussian model. From this we conclude that adaptation 
to a left-right reversal emerges in a regional and interdependent fashion, and 
can be modeled as overlapping Gaussian tuned processes.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humov.2011.02.007
PMID: 21764164 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


203. J Neurophysiol. 2013 Dec;110(12):2857-62. doi: 10.1152/jn.00112.2013. Epub 2013 
Sep 25.

The dynamics of sensorimotor calibration in reaching-to-grasp movements.

Bingham GP(1), Mon-Williams MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, 
Bloomington, Indiana; and.

Reach-to-grasp movements require information about the distance and size of 
target objects. Calibration of this information could be achieved via feedback 
information (visual and/or haptic) regarding terminal accuracy when target 
objects are grasped. A number of reports suggest that the nervous system alters 
reach-to-grasp behavior following either a visual or haptic error signal 
indicating inaccurate reaching. Nevertheless, the reported modification is 
generally partial (reaching is changed less than predicted by the feedback 
error), a finding that has been ascribed to slow adaptation rates. It is 
possible, however, that the modified reaching reflects the system's weighting of 
the visual and haptic information in the presence of noise rather than 
calibration per se. We modeled the dynamics of calibration and showed that the 
discrepancy between reaching behavior and the feedback error results from an 
incomplete calibration process. Our results provide evidence for calibration 
being an intrinsic feature of reach-to-grasp behavior.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00112.2013
PMCID: PMC3882819
PMID: 24068760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Neurosci Lett. 2015 Mar 30;591:25-29. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2015.02.012. Epub 
2015 Feb 9.

Feedback delays eliminate auditory-motor learning in speech production.

Max L(1), Maffett DG(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Speech and Hearing Sciences, University of Washington, 1417 
N.E. 42nd St. Seattle, WA 98105-6246, USA; Haskins Laboratories, 300 George St. 
Suite 900, New Haven, CT 06511, USA. Electronic address: LudoMax@uw.edu.
(2)Department of Speech and Hearing Sciences, University of Washington, 1417 
N.E. 42nd St. Seattle, WA 98105-6246, USA.

Neurologically healthy individuals use sensory feedback to alter future 
movements by updating internal models of the effector system and environment. 
For example, when visual feedback about limb movements or auditory feedback 
about speech movements is experimentally perturbed, the planning of subsequent 
movements is adjusted - i.e., sensorimotor adaptation occurs. A separate line of 
studies has demonstrated that experimentally delaying the sensory consequences 
of limb movements causes the sensory input to be attributed to external sources 
rather than to one's own actions. Yet similar feedback delays have remarkably 
little effect on visuo-motor adaptation (although the rate of learning varies, 
the amount of adaptation is only moderately affected with delays of 100-200ms, 
and adaptation still occurs even with a delay as long as 5000ms). Thus, limb 
motor learning remains largely intact even in conditions where error assignment 
favors external factors. Here, we show a fundamentally different result for 
sensorimotor control of speech articulation: auditory-motor adaptation to 
formant-shifted feedback is completely eliminated with delays of 100ms or more. 
Thus, for speech motor learning, real-time auditory feedback is critical. This 
novel finding informs theoretical models of human motor control in general and 
speech motor control in particular, and it has direct implications for the 
application of motor learning principles in the habilitation and rehabilitation 
of individuals with various sensorimotor speech disorders.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2015.02.012
PMCID: PMC4363140
PMID: 25676810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Sci Rep. 2021 Jan 28;11(1):2507. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-77543-8.

Cerebellar contribution to sensorimotor adaptation deficits in humans with 
spinal cord injury.

Lei Y(1)(2), Perez MA(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health and Kinesiology, Texas A&M University, College Station, 
TX, 77845, USA.
(2)The Miami Project to Cure Paralysis, Bruce W. Carter Department of Veterans 
Affairs Medical Center, University of Miami, Miami, FL, 33136, USA.
(3)Shirley Ryan Ability Lab, Northwestern University, Edward Hines, Jr. VA 
Hospital, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, 60611, USA. mperez04@sralab.org.
(4)The Miami Project to Cure Paralysis, Bruce W. Carter Department of Veterans 
Affairs Medical Center, University of Miami, Miami, FL, 33136, USA. 
mperez04@sralab.org.

Humans with spinal cord injury (SCI) show deficits in associating motor commands 
and sensory feedback. Do these deficits affect their ability to adapt movements 
to new demands? To address this question, we used a robotic exoskeleton to 
examine learning of a sensorimotor adaptation task during reaching movements by 
distorting the relationship between hand movement and visual feedback in 22 
individuals with chronic incomplete cervical SCI and 22 age-matched control 
subjects. We found that SCI individuals showed a reduced ability to learn from 
movement errors compared with control subjects. Sensorimotor areas in anterior 
and posterior cerebellar lobules contribute to learning of movement errors in 
intact humans. Structural brain imaging showed that sensorimotor areas in the 
cerebellum, including lobules I-VI, were reduced in size in SCI compared with 
control subjects and cerebellar atrophy increased with increasing time post 
injury. Notably, the degree of spared tissue in the cerebellum was positively 
correlated with learning rates, indicating participants with lesser atrophy 
showed higher learning rates. These results suggest that the reduced ability to 
learn from movement errors during reaching movements in humans with SCI involves 
abnormalities in the spinocerebellar structures. We argue that this information 
might help in the rehabilitation of people with SCI.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-77543-8
PMCID: PMC7843630
PMID: 33510183

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


206. J Neurosci. 2004 Oct 6;24(40):8662-71. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2214-04.2004.

Failure to consolidate the consolidation theory of learning for sensorimotor 
adaptation tasks.

Caithness G(1), Osu R, Bays P, Chase H, Klassen J, Kawato M, Wolpert DM, 
Flanagan JR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Centre for Neuroscience Studies, Queen's 
University, Kingston, Ontario, K7L 3N6 Canada.

An influential idea in human motor learning is that there is a consolidation 
period during which motor memories are transformed from a fragile to a permanent 
state, no longer susceptible to interference from new learning. The evidence 
supporting this idea comes from studies showing that the motor memory of a task 
(A) is lost when an opposing task (B) is experienced soon after, but not if 
sufficient time is allowed to pass (approximately 6 hr). We report results from 
three laboratories challenging this consolidation idea. We used an ABA paradigm 
in the context of a reaching task to assess the influence of experiencing B 
after A on the retention of A. In two experiments using visuomotor rotations, we 
found that B fully interferes with the retention of A even when B is experienced 
24 hr after A. Contrary to previous reports, in four experiments on learning 
force fields, we also observed full interference between A and B when they are 
separated by 24 hr or even 1 week. This latter result holds for both 
position-dependent and velocity-dependent force fields. For both the visuomotor 
and force-field tasks, complete interference is still observed when the possible 
affects of anterograde interference are controlled through the use of washout 
trials. Our results fail to support the idea that motor memories become 
consolidated into a protected state. Rather, they are consistent with recent 
ideas of memory formation, which propose that memories can shift between active 
and inactive states.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2214-04.2004
PMCID: PMC6729970
PMID: 15470131 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Front Comput Neurosci. 2014 Mar 11;8:28. doi: 10.3389/fncom.2014.00028. 
eCollection 2014.

A hypothesis on the role of perturbation size on the human sensorimotor 
adaptation.

Yavari F(1), Towhidkhah F(1), Darainy M(2).

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Engineering Department, Amirkabir University of Technology Tehran, 
Iran.
(2)Department of Psychology, McGill University Montreal, QC, Canada.

DOI: 10.3389/fncom.2014.00028
PMCID: PMC3949136
PMID: 24653692


208. Exp Brain Res. 2001 Oct;140(4):407-10. doi: 10.1007/s002210100846.

Sensorimotor adaptation to rotated visual input: different mechanisms for small 
versus large rotations.

Abeele S(1), Bock O.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Physiology, German Sport University, 50927 Cologne, Germany. 
abeele@hrz.dshs-koeln.de

The present study investigates if sensorimotor adaptation to large visual 
rotations is achieved by a continuous angular change of the internal 
representation of space. Human subjects performed manual tracking movements 
under rotated visual feedback in two sessions; the magnitude of rotation in the 
second session was 45 degrees larger or smaller than in the first. We found 
mostly a facilitatory effect of the first adaptation on the second, which 
supports the view that the internal representation can gradually shift from one 
angular transformation to another. However, no facilitation was found for visual 
rotations in the 80-120 degrees range, suggesting that the internal model 
changes gradually only up to a limiting angle. A subsidiary experiment, 
employing small stepwise changes of visual rotation throughout a testing 
session, confirmed this view and placed the limiting angle near 120 degrees for 
an increasing, and near 70 degrees for a decreasing visual rotation. We conclude 
that adaptation to large-magnitude rotations may be achieved in two stages: a 
polarity inversion of both axes (=180 degrees rotation), followed by a 
"backward" shift toward somewhat smaller angles.

DOI: 10.1007/s002210100846
PMID: 11685393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Front Behav Neurosci. 2016 Jan 5;9:332. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2015.00332. 
eCollection 2015.

The Effects of Short-Lasting Anti-Saccade Training in Homonymous Hemianopia with 
and without Saccadic Adaptation.

Lévy-Bencheton D(1), Pélisson D(1), Prost M(2), Jacquin-Courtois S(3), Salemme 
R(1), Pisella L(1), Tilikete C(4).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Research Center - Institut National de la Santé et de la 
Recherche Médicale U 1028 - Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique UMR 
5292 Bron, France.
(2)Neuroscience Research Center - Institut National de la Santé et de la 
Recherche Médicale U 1028 - Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique UMR 
5292Bron, France; Unité de Neuro-ophtalmologie, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Hôpital 
Neurologique Pierre WertheimerBron, France.
(3)Neuroscience Research Center - Institut National de la Santé et de la 
Recherche Médicale U 1028 - Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique UMR 
5292Bron, France; University Lyon 1Lyon, France; Hospices Civils de Lyon, 
Hôpital Henry GabrielleSaint Genis-Laval, France.
(4)Neuroscience Research Center - Institut National de la Santé et de la 
Recherche Médicale U 1028 - Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique UMR 
5292Bron, France; Unité de Neuro-ophtalmologie, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Hôpital 
Neurologique Pierre WertheimerBron, France; University Lyon 1Lyon, France.

Homonymous Visual Field Defects (HVFD) are common following stroke and can be 
highly debilitating for visual perception and higher level cognitive functions 
such as exploring visual scene or reading a text. Rehabilitation using 
oculomotor compensatory methods with automatic training over a short duration 
(~15 days) have been shown as efficient as longer voluntary training methods (>1 
month). Here, we propose to evaluate and compare the effect of an original HVFD 
rehabilitation method based on a single 15 min voluntary anti-saccades task (AS) 
toward the blind hemifield, with automatic sensorimotor adaptation to increase 
AS amplitude. In order to distinguish between adaptation and training effect, 14 
left- or right-HVFD patients were exposed, 1 month apart, to three trainings, 
two isolated AS task (Delayed-shift and No-shift paradigm), and one combined 
with AS adaptation (Adaptation paradigm). A quality of life questionnaire 
(NEI-VFQ 25) and functional measurements (reading speed, visual exploration time 
in pop-out and serial tasks) as well as oculomotor measurements were assessed 
before and after each training. We could not demonstrate significant adaptation 
at the group level, but we identified a group of nine adapted patients. While AS 
training itself proved to demonstrate significant functional improvements in the 
overall patient group, we could also demonstrate in the sub-group of adapted 
patients and specifically following the adaptation training, an increase of 
saccade amplitude during the reading task (left-HVFD patients) and the Serial 
exploration task, and improvement of the visual quality of life. We conclude 
that short-lasting AS training combined with adaptation could be implemented in 
rehabilitation methods of cognitive dysfunctions following HVFD. Indeed, both 
voluntary and automatic processes have shown interesting effects on the control 
of visually guided saccades in different cognitive tasks.

DOI: 10.3389/fnbeh.2015.00332
PMCID: PMC4700208
PMID: 26778986


210. Front Physiol. 2017 Oct 20;8:821. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2017.00821. eCollection 
2017.

Sensorimotor Reorganizations of Arm Kinematics and Postural Strategy for 
Functional Whole-Body Reaching Movements in Microgravity.

Macaluso T(1), Bourdin C(1), Buloup F(1), Mille ML(1)(2)(3), Sainton P(1), 
Sarlegna FR(1), Vercher JL(1), Bringoux L(1).

Author information:
(1)Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, ISM, Marseille, France.
(2)UFR STAPS, Université de Toulon, La Garde, France.
(3)Department of Physical Therapy and Human Movement Sciences, Feinberg School 
of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, United States.

Understanding the impact of weightlessness on human behavior during the 
forthcoming long-term space missions is of critical importance, especially when 
considering the efficiency of goal-directed movements in these unusual 
environments. Several studies provided a large set of evidence that gravity is 
taken into account during the planning stage of arm reaching movements to 
optimally anticipate its consequence upon the moving limbs. However, less is 
known about sensorimotor changes required to face weightless environments when 
individuals have to perform fast and accurate goal-directed actions with 
whole-body displacement. We thus aimed at characterizing kinematic features of 
whole-body reaching movements in microgravity, involving high spatiotemporal 
constraints of execution, to question whether and how humans are able to 
maintain the performance of a functional behavior in the standards of 
normogravity execution. Seven participants were asked to reach as fast and as 
accurately as possible visual targets while standing during microgravity 
episodes in parabolic flight. Small and large targets were presented either 
close or far from the participants (requiring, in the latter case, additional 
whole-body displacement). Results reported that participants successfully 
performed the reaching task with general temporal features of movement (e.g., 
movement speed) close to land observations. However, our analyses also 
demonstrated substantial kinematic changes related to the temporal structure of 
focal movement and the postural strategy to successfully perform -constrained- 
whole-body reaching movements in microgravity. These immediate reorganizations 
are likely achieved by rapidly taking into account the absence of gravity in 
motor preparation and execution (presumably from cues about body limbs 
unweighting). Specifically, when compared to normogravity, the arm deceleration 
phase substantially increased. Furthermore, greater whole-body forward 
displacements due to smaller trunk flexions occurred when reaching far targets 
in microgravity. Remarkably, these changes of focal kinematics and postural 
strategy appear close to those previously reported when participants performed 
the same task underwater with neutral buoyancy applied to body limbs. Overall, 
these novel findings reveal that humans are able to maintain the performance of 
functional goal-directed whole-body actions in weightlessness by successfully 
managing spatiotemporal constraints of execution in this unusual environment.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2017.00821
PMCID: PMC5654841
PMID: 29104544


211. NPJ Microgravity. 2016 Dec 19;2:2. doi: 10.1038/s41526-016-0001-9. eCollection 
2016.

Brain structural plasticity with spaceflight.

Koppelmans V(1), Bloomberg JJ(2), Mulavara AP(3), Seidler RD(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Kinesiology, University of Michigan, 401 Washtenaw Ave., Ann Arbor, 
MI 48109-2214 USA.
(2)NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX 77058 USA.
(3)KBRwyle, Houston, TX 77058 USA.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109 USA.

Erratum in
    NPJ Microgravity. 2017 Nov 27;3:30.

Humans undergo extensive sensorimotor adaptation during spaceflight due to 
altered vestibular inputs and body unloading. No studies have yet evaluated the 
effects of spaceflight on human brain structure despite the fact that recently 
reported optic nerve structural changes are hypothesized to occur due to 
increased intracranial pressure occurring with microgravity. This is the first 
report on human brain structural changes with spaceflight. We evaluated 
retrospective longitudinal T2-weighted MRI scans and balance data from 27 
astronauts (thirteen ~2-week shuttle crew members and fourteen ~6-month 
International Space Station crew members) to determine spaceflight effects on 
brain structure, and whether any pre to postflight brain changes are associated 
with balance changes. Data were obtained from the NASA Lifetime Surveillance of 
Astronaut Health. Brain scans were segmented into gray matter maps and 
normalized into MNI space using a stepwise approach through subject specific 
templates. Non-parametric permutation testing was used to analyze pre to 
postflight volumetric gray matter changes. We found extensive volumetric gray 
matter decreases, including large areas covering the temporal and frontal poles 
and around the orbits. This effect was larger in International Space Station 
versus shuttle crew members in some regions. There were bilateral focal gray 
matter increases within the medial primary somatosensory and motor cortex; i.e., 
the cerebral areas where the lower limbs are represented. These intriguing 
findings are observed in a retrospective data set; future prospective studies 
should probe the underlying mechanisms and behavioral consequences.

DOI: 10.1038/s41526-016-0001-9
PMCID: PMC5460234
PMID: 28649622


212. Neuroimage. 2018 Oct 1;179:348-356. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.06.051. Epub 
2018 Jun 20.

A cortical substrate for the long-term memory of saccadic eye movements 
calibration.

Pélisson D(1), Habchi O(2), Panouillères MTN(3), Hernoux C(2), Farnè A(2).

Author information:
(1)Lyon Neurosciences Research Center (CRNL), Inserm U1028 - CNRS UMR5292 - 
University Claude Bernard, Lyon, France. Electronic address: 
denis.pelisson@inserm.fr.
(2)Lyon Neurosciences Research Center (CRNL), Inserm U1028 - CNRS UMR5292 - 
University Claude Bernard, Lyon, France.
(3)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, United Kingdom.

How movements are continuously adapted to physiological and environmental 
changes is a fundamental question in systems neuroscience. While many studies 
have elucidated the mechanisms which underlie short-term sensorimotor adaptation 
(∼10-30 min), how these motor memories are maintained over longer-term (>3-5 
days) -and thanks to which neural systems-is virtually unknown. Here, we examine 
in healthy human participants whether the temporo-parietal junction (TPJ) is 
causally involved in the induction and/or the retention of saccadic eye 
movements' adaptation. Single-pulse transcranial magnetic stimulation (spTMS) 
was applied while subjects performed a ∼15min size-decrease adaptation task of 
leftward reactive saccades. A TMS pulse was delivered over the TPJ in the right 
hemisphere (rTPJ) in each trial either 30, 60, 90 or 120 msec (in 4 separate 
adaptation sessions) after the saccade onset. In two control groups of subjects, 
the same adaptation procedure was achieved either alone (No-TMS) or combined 
with spTMS applied over the vertex (SHAM-TMS). While the timing of spTMS over 
the rTPJ did not significantly affect the speed and immediate after-effect of 
adaptation, we found that the amount of adaptation retention measured 10 days 
later was markedly larger (42%) than in both the No-TMS (21%) and the SHAM-TMS 
(11%) control groups. These results demonstrate for the first time that the 
cerebral cortex is causally involved in maintaining long-term oculomotor 
memories.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.06.051
PMID: 29933041 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Aviat Space Environ Med. 2010 Sep;81(9):819-24. doi: 10.3357/asem.2608.2010.

Cognitive demand of human sensorimotor performance during an extended space 
mission: a dual-task study.

Bock O(1), Weigelt C, Bloomberg JJ.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Physiology and Anatomy, German Sport University, 50927 Cologne, 
Germany. bock@dshs-koeln.de

INTRODUCTION: Two previous single-case studies found that the dual-task costs of 
manual tracking plus memory search increased during a space mission, and 
concluded that sensorimotor deficits during spaceflight may be related to 
cognitive overload. Since dual-task costs were insensitive to the difficulty of 
memory search, the authors argued that the overload may reflect stress-related 
problems of multitasking, rather than a scarcity of specific cognitive 
resources. Here we expand the available database and compare different types of 
concurrent task.
METHODS: Three subjects were repeatedly tested before, during, and after an 
extended mission on the International Space Station (ISS). They performed an 
unstable tracking task and four reaction-time tasks, both separately and 
concurrently. Inflight data could only be obtained during later parts of the 
mission.
RESULTS: The tracking error increased from pre- to in flight by a factor of 
about 2, both under single- and dual-task conditions. The dual-task costs with a 
reaction-time task requiring rhythm production was 2.4 times higher than with a 
reaction-time task requiring visuo-spatial transformations, and 8 times higher 
than with a regular choice reaction-time task.
CONCLUSIONS: Long-term sensorimotor deficits during spaceflight may reflect not 
only stress, but also a scarcity of resources related to complex motor 
programming; possibly those resources are tied up by sensorimotor adaptation to 
the space environment.

DOI: 10.3357/asem.2608.2010
PMID: 20824987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


214. J Neurophysiol. 2011 Dec;106(6):3157-72. doi: 10.1152/jn.01008.2010. Epub 2011 
Sep 14.

Trial-by-trial analysis of intermanual transfer during visuomotor adaptation.

Taylor JA(1), Wojaczynski GJ, Ivry RB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. 
jordan.a.taylor@berkeley.edu

Studies of intermanual transfer have been used to probe representations formed 
during skill acquisition. We employ a new method that provides a continuous 
assay of intermanual transfer, intermixing right- and left-hand trials while 
limiting visual feedback to right-hand movements. We manipulated the degree of 
awareness of the visuomotor rotation, introducing a 22.5° perturbation in either 
an abrupt single step or gradually in ∼1° increments every 10 trials. 
Intermanual transfer was observed with the direction of left-hand movements 
shifting in the opposite direction of the rotation over the course of training. 
The transfer on left-hand trials was less than that observed in the right hand. 
Moreover, the magnitude of transfer was larger in our mixed-limb design compared 
with the standard blocked design in which transfer is only probed at the end of 
training. Transfer was similar in the abrupt and gradual groups, suggesting that 
awareness of the perturbation has little effect on intermanual transfer. In a 
final experiment, participants were provided with a strategy to offset an abrupt 
rotation, a method that has been shown to increase error over the course of 
training due to the operation of sensorimotor adaptation. This deterioration was 
also observed on left-hand probe trials, providing further support that 
awareness has little effect on intermanual transfer. These results indicate that 
intermanual transfer is not dependent on the implementation of cognitively 
assisted strategies that participants might adopt when they become aware that 
the visuomotor mapping has been perturbed. Rather, the results indicate that the 
information available to processes involved in adaptation entails some degree of 
effector independence.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.01008.2010
PMCID: PMC3234099
PMID: 21917998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


215. J Physiol. 2009 Jan 15;587(1):127-38. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2008.159459. Epub 
2008 Nov 17.

Adaptation of reactive and voluntary saccades: different patterns of adaptation 
revealed in the antisaccade task.

Cotti J(1), Panouilleres M, Munoz DP, Vercher JL, Pélisson D, Guillaume A.

Author information:
(1)CNRS/Université de la Méditerranée, Institut des Sciences du Mouvement UMR 
6233, 163 av de Luminy, CP 910, 13288 Marseille, France.

Comment in
    J Physiol. 2009 Jan 15;587(1):5.

Sensorimotor adaptation restores and maintains the accuracy of goal-directed 
movements. It remains unclear whether these adaptive mechanisms modify actions 
by controlling peripheral premotor stages that send commands to the effectors 
and/or earlier processing stages involved in registration of target location. 
Here, we studied the effect of adaptation of saccadic eye movements, a 
well-established model of sensorimotor adaptation, in an antisaccade task. This 
task introduces a clear spatial dissociation between the actual target direction 
and the requested saccade direction because the correct movement direction is in 
the opposite direction from the target location. We used this requirement of a 
vector inversion to assess the level(s) of saccadic adaptation for two different 
types of adapted saccades. In two different experiments, we tested the transfer 
to antisaccades of the adaptation in one direction of reactive saccades to 
jumping targets and of scanning voluntary saccades within a target array. In the 
first experiment, we found that adaptation of reactive saccades transferred only 
to antisaccades in the adapted direction. In contrast, in the second experiment, 
adaptation of scanning voluntary saccades transferred to antisaccades in both 
the adapted and non-adapted directions. We conclude that adaptation of reactive 
saccades acts only downstream of the vector inversion required in the 
antisaccade task, whereas adaptation of voluntary saccades has a distributed 
influence, acting both upstream and downstream of vector inversion.

DOI: 10.1113/jphysiol.2008.159459
PMCID: PMC2670028
PMID: 19015199 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Neurophysiol. 2017 Sep 1;118(3):1709-1719. doi: 10.1152/jn.00089.2017. Epub 
2017 Jun 28.

Impaired visuomotor generalization by inconsistent attentional contexts.

Wang TSL(1), Song JH(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive, Linguistic, and Psychological Science, Brown 
University, Providence, Rhode Island; and tony.wang@brown.edu.
(2)Department of Cognitive, Linguistic, and Psychological Science, Brown 
University, Providence, Rhode Island; and.
(3)Brown Institute for Brain Sciences, Brown University, Providence, Rhode 
Island.

In daily life, people are constantly presented with situations in which they 
have to learn and acquire new motor skills in complex environments, where 
attention is often distracted by other events. Being able to generalize and 
perform the acquired motor action in different environments is a crucial part of 
visuomotor learning. The current study examined whether attentional distraction 
impairs generalization of visuomotor adaptation or whether consistent 
distraction can operate as an internal cue to facilitate generalization. Using a 
dual-task paradigm combining visuomotor rotational adaptation and an 
attention-demanding secondary task, we showed that switching the attentional 
context from training (dual-task) to generalization (single-task) reduced the 
range of transfer of visuomotor adaptation to untrained directions. However, 
when consistent distraction was present throughout training and generalization, 
visuomotor generalization was equivalent to without distractions at all. 
Furthermore, this attentional context-dependent generalization was evident even 
when sensory modality of distractions differed between training and 
generalization. Therefore, the general nature of the dual tasks, rather than the 
specific stimuli, is associated with visuomotor memory and serves as a critical 
cue for generalization. Taken together, we demonstrated that attention plays a 
critical role during sensorimotor adaptation in selecting and associating 
multisensory signals with motor memory. This finding provides insight into 
developing learning programs that are generalizable in complex daily 
environments.NEW & NOTEWORTHY Learning novel motor actions in complex 
environments with attentional distraction is a critical function. Successful 
motor learning involves the ability to transfer the acquired skill from the 
trained to novel environments. Here, we demonstrate attentional distraction does 
not impair visuomotor adaptation. Rather, consistency in the attentional context 
from training to generalization modulates the degree of transfer to untrained 
locations. The role of attention and memory must, therefore, be incorporated 
into existing models of visuomotor learning.

Copyright © 2017 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00089.2017
PMCID: PMC5596127
PMID: 28659458 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


217. PLoS Comput Biol. 2011 Mar;7(3):e1001096. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1001096. 
Epub 2011 Mar 3.

Flexible cognitive strategies during motor learning.

Taylor JA(1), Ivry RB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, 
California, USA. jordan.a.taylor@berkeley.edu

Visuomotor rotation tasks have proven to be a powerful tool to study adaptation 
of the motor system. While adaptation in such tasks is seemingly automatic and 
incremental, participants may gain knowledge of the perturbation and invoke a 
compensatory strategy. When provided with an explicit strategy to counteract a 
rotation, participants are initially very accurate, even without on-line 
feedback. Surprisingly, with further testing, the angle of their reaching 
movements drifts in the direction of the strategy, producing an increase in 
endpoint errors. This drift is attributed to the gradual adaptation of an 
internal model that operates independently from the strategy, even at the cost 
of task accuracy. Here we identify constraints that influence this process, 
allowing us to explore models of the interaction between strategic and implicit 
changes during visuomotor adaptation. When the adaptation phase was extended, 
participants eventually modified their strategy to offset the rise in endpoint 
errors. Moreover, when we removed visual markers that provided external 
landmarks to support a strategy, the degree of drift was sharply attenuated. 
These effects are accounted for by a setpoint state-space model in which a 
strategy is flexibly adjusted to offset performance errors arising from the 
implicit adaptation of an internal model. More generally, these results suggest 
that strategic processes may operate in many studies of visuomotor adaptation, 
with participants arriving at a synergy between a strategic plan and the effects 
of sensorimotor adaptation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1001096
PMCID: PMC3048379
PMID: 21390266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


218. J Mot Behav. 2012;44(6):445-53. doi: 10.1080/00222895.2012.672348.

Neurocognitive contributions to motor skill learning: the role of working 
memory.

Seidler RD(1), Bo J, Anguera JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2214, 
USA. rseidler@umich.edu

Researchers have begun to delineate the precise nature and neural correlates of 
the cognitive processes that contribute to motor skill learning. The authors 
review recent work from their laboratory designed to further understand the 
neurocognitive mechanisms of skill acquisition. The authors have demonstrated an 
important role for spatial working memory in 2 different types of motor skill 
learning, sensorimotor adaptation and motor sequence learning. They have shown 
that individual differences in spatial working memory capacity predict the rate 
of motor learning for sensorimotor adaptation and motor sequence learning, and 
have also reported neural overlap between a spatial working memory task and the 
early, but not late, stages of adaptation, particularly in the right 
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and bilateral inferior parietal lobules. The 
authors propose that spatial working memory is relied on for processing motor 
error information to update motor control for subsequent actions. Further, they 
suggest that working memory is relied on during learning new action sequences 
for chunking individual action elements together.

DOI: 10.1080/00222895.2012.672348
PMCID: PMC3534841
PMID: 23237467 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Eur J Prosthodont Restor Dent. 2019 May 30;27(2):84-89. doi: 
10.1922/EJPRD_01910Villarinho06.

Early Effect of Implant-Supported Rehabilitation and Nocturnal Bruxism on 
Maximum Occlusal Force: A Cross-Sectional Study.

Dias de Lima G(1), Ozkomur A(2), Villarinho EA(3), de Lima Coltro MP(3), Vigo 
A(4), Shinkai RSA(3).

Author information:
(1)Serviço Social do Comércio - Sesc/RS, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(2)Universidade Luterana do Brasil (ULBRA), Dental School, Canoas, Brazil.
(3)Pontifical Catholic University of Rio Grande do Sul (PUCRS), Porto Alegre, 
Brazil.
(4)Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS), Porto Alegre, Brazil.

This clinical study evaluated the early effect of oral rehabilitation with 
dental implants and nocturnal bruxism on maximum occlusal force (MOF), before 
sensorimotor adaptation. A consecutive sample consisted of 127 patients divided 
into three groups according to their dental state: G1- implant-supported fixed 
complete denture (IFCD) opposing to a small fixed prosthesis or natural 
dentition; G2- IFCD opposing to a complete denture; and G3- small fixed 
prosthesis or natural dentition in both arches. Clinical data were collected 
after prosthesis installation: systemic and oral health conditions, MOF, 
self-reported bruxism, and bruxism severity (low, moderate, severe). Data were 
analysed by ANOVA and Tukey-Krammer tests. Dental state and the interaction 
sex-bruxism had significant effect on MOF. G1 had higher MOF than G3, but G2 was 
not significantly different from G1 and G3. Men with bruxism had the highest 
MOF. The levels of bruxism severity did not have a significant effect on MOF. 
The results suggest that MOF varies as a function of dental state and the 
interaction sex-bruxism. However, presence and severity of bruxism alone does 
not affect MOF.

Copyright© 2019 Dennis Barber Ltd.

DOI: 10.1922/EJPRD_01910Villarinho06
PMID: 31145559 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Sci Rep. 2018 Jan 19;8(1):1274. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-19751-x.

Abnormal Speech Motor Control in Individuals with 16p11.2 Deletions.

Demopoulos C(1), Kothare H(2), Mizuiri D(2), Henderson-Sabes J(3), Fregeau B(4), 
Tjernagel J(5), Houde JF(3), Sherr EH(4), Nagarajan SS(6).

Author information:
(1)University of California-San Francisco, Department of Radiology & Biomedical 
Imaging, 513 Parnassus Avenue, S362., San Francisco, CA, 94143, USA. 
Carly.Demopoulos@ucsf.edu.
(2)University of California-San Francisco, Department of Radiology & Biomedical 
Imaging, 513 Parnassus Avenue, S362., San Francisco, CA, 94143, USA.
(3)University of California-San Francisco, Department of Otolaryngology-Head and 
Neck Surgery, 2233 Post Street, San Francisco, CA, 94115, USA.
(4)University of California-San Francisco, Department of Neurology, 675 Nelson 
Rising Lane, San Francisco, CA, 94143, USA.
(5)Simons Foundation Autism Research Initiative, 160 Fifth Avenue, 7th Floor New 
York, New York, NY, 10010, USA.
(6)University of California-San Francisco, Department of Radiology & Biomedical 
Imaging, 513 Parnassus Avenue, S362., San Francisco, CA, 94143, USA. 
Srikantan.Nagarajan@ucsf.edu.

Speech and motor deficits are highly prevalent (>70%) in individuals with the 
600 kb BP4-BP5 16p11.2 deletion; however, the mechanisms that drive these 
deficits are unclear, limiting our ability to target interventions and advance 
treatment. This study examined fundamental aspects of speech motor control in 
participants with the 16p11.2 deletion. To assess capacity for control of voice, 
we examined how accurately and quickly subjects changed the pitch of their voice 
within a trial to correct for a transient perturbation of the pitch of their 
auditory feedback. When compared to controls, 16p11.2 deletion carriers show an 
over-exaggerated pitch compensation response to unpredictable mid-vocalization 
pitch perturbations. We also examined sensorimotor adaptation of speech by 
assessing how subjects learned to adapt their sustained productions of formants 
(speech spectral peak frequencies important for vowel identity), in response to 
consistent changes in their auditory feedback during vowel production. Deletion 
carriers show reduced sensorimotor adaptation to sustained vowel identity 
changes in auditory feedback. These results together suggest that 16p11.2 
deletion carriers have fundamental impairments in the basic mechanisms of speech 
motor control and these impairments may partially explain the deficits in speech 
and language in these individuals.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-19751-x
PMCID: PMC5775320
PMID: 29352208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


221. Brain. 2013 Jul;136(Pt 7):2050-62. doi: 10.1093/brain/awt147.

Defective cerebellar control of cortical plasticity in writer's cramp.

Hubsch C(1), Roze E, Popa T, Russo M, Balachandran A, Pradeep S, Mueller F, 
Brochard V, Quartarone A, Degos B, Vidailhet M, Kishore A, Meunier S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France.

Comment in
    Brain. 2015 Jun;138(Pt 6):e356.
    Brain. 2015 Jun;138(Pt 6):e355.

A large body of evidence points to a role of basal ganglia dysfunction in the 
pathophysiology of dystonia, but recent studies indicate that cerebellar 
dysfunction may also be involved. The cerebellum influences sensorimotor 
adaptation by modulating sensorimotor plasticity of the primary motor cortex. 
Motor cortex sensorimotor plasticity is maladaptive in patients with writer's 
cramp. Here we examined whether putative cerebellar dysfunction in dystonia is 
linked to these patients' maladaptive plasticity. To that end we compared the 
performances of patients and healthy control subjects in a reaching task 
involving a visuomotor conflict generated by imposing a random deviation (-40° 
to 40°) on the direction of movement of the mouse/cursor. Such a task is known 
to involve the cerebellum. We also compared, between patients and healthy 
control subjects, how the cerebellum modulates the extent and duration of an 
ongoing sensorimotor plasticity in the motor cortex. The cerebellar cortex was 
excited or inhibited by means of repeated transcranial magnetic stimulation 
before artificial sensorimotor plasticity was induced in the motor cortex by 
paired associative stimulation. Patients with writer's cramp were slower than 
the healthy control subjects to reach the target and, after having repeatedly 
adapted their trajectories to the deviations, they were less efficient than the 
healthy control subjects to perform reaching movement without imposed deviation. 
It was interpreted as impaired washing-out abilities. In healthy subjects, 
cerebellar cortex excitation prevented the paired associative stimulation to 
induce a sensorimotor plasticity in the primary motor cortex, whereas cerebellar 
cortex inhibition led the paired associative stimulation to be more efficient in 
inducing the plasticity. In patients with writer's cramp, cerebellar cortex 
excitation and inhibition were both ineffective in modulating sensorimotor 
plasticity. In patients with writer's cramp, but not in healthy subjects, 
behavioural parameters reflecting their capacity for adapting to the rotation 
and for washing-out of an earlier adaptation predicted the efficacy of 
inhibitory cerebellar conditioning to influence sensorimotor plasticity: the 
better the online adaptation, the smaller the influence of cerebellar inhibitory 
stimulation on motor cortex plasticity. Altered cerebellar encoding of incoming 
afferent volleys may result in decoupling the motor component from the afferent 
information flow, and also in maladjusted sensorimotor calibration. The loss of 
cerebellar control over sensorimotor plasticity might also lead to building up 
an incorrect motor program to specific adaptation tasks such as writing.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awt147
PMCID: PMC3692031
PMID: 23801734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


222. J Speech Lang Hear Res. 2019 Apr 26;62(4S):1144-1151. doi: 
10.1044/2018_JSLHR-H-ASCC7-18-0124.

Different Responses to Altered Auditory Feedback in Younger and Older Adults 
Reflect Differences in Lexical Bias.

Colby S(1)(2), Shiller DM(2)(3)(4), Clayards M(1)(2)(5), Baum S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Communication Sciences & Disorders, McGill University, Montreal, 
Québec, Canada.
(2)Centre for Research on Brain, Language, and Music, Montreal, Québec, Canada.
(3)École d'orthophonie et d'audiologie, Université de Montréal, Québec, Canada.
(4)CHU Sainte-Justine Hospital Research Centre, Montreal, Québec, Canada.
(5)Department of Linguistics, McGill University, Montreal, Québec, Canada.

Purpose Previous work has found that both young and older adults exhibit a 
lexical bias in categorizing speech stimuli. In young adults, this has been 
argued to be an automatic influence of the lexicon on perceptual category 
boundaries. Older adults exhibit more top-down biases than younger adults, 
including an increased lexical bias. We investigated the nature of the increased 
lexical bias using a sensorimotor adaptation task designed to evaluate whether 
automatic processes drive this bias in older adults. Method A group of older 
adults ( n = 27) and younger adults ( n = 35) participated in an altered 
auditory feedback production task. Participants produced target words and 
nonwords under altered feedback that affected the 1st formant of the vowel. 
There were 2 feedback conditions that affected the lexical status of the target, 
such that target words were shifted to sound more like nonwords (e.g., 
less-liss) and target nonwords to sound more like words (e.g., kess-kiss). 
Results A mixed-effects linear regression was used to investigate the magnitude 
of compensation to altered auditory feedback between age groups and lexical 
conditions. Over the course of the experiment, older adults compensated (by 
shifting their production of 1st formant) more to altered auditory feedback when 
producing words that were shifted toward nonwords ( less-liss) than when 
producing nonwords that were shifted toward words ( kess-kiss). This is in 
contrast to younger adults who compensated more to nonwords that were shifted 
toward words compared to words that were shifted toward nonwords. Conclusion We 
found no evidence that the increased lexical bias previously observed in older 
adults is driven by a greater sensitivity to top-down lexical influence on 
perceptual category boundaries. We suggest the increased lexical bias in older 
adults is driven by postperceptual processes that arise as a result of 
age-related cognitive and sensory changes.

DOI: 10.1044/2018_JSLHR-H-ASCC7-18-0124
PMID: 31026194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Exp Brain Res. 2001 Jul;139(2):248-53. doi: 10.1007/s002210100768.

Mechanisms for sensorimotor adaptation to rotated visual input.

Abeele S(1), Bock O.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Physiology, German Sport University, Cologne. 
abeele@hrz.dshs-koeln.de

Using the multiple-exposure approach, we investigated sensorimotor adaptation by 
exposing human subjects to different angles of visual rotation in a tracking 
task. Generally, the tracking error was high at the onset of the visual rotation 
and gradually declined towards the baseline level during the exposure period. In 
experiment A, we confirmed that the initial tracking error increases more than 
proportionally with the angle of rotation. In experiment C, we were unable to 
confirm intermanual transfer, and attribute this discrepancy with previous 
literature to details of the experimental tasks. In our main experiment, B, we 
found that pre-exposure to 45 degrees or 60 degrees of visual rotation 
facilitated the subsequent adaptation to a 90 degrees rotation, with the 
facilitatory effect being more pronounced following the 60 degrees rotation. We 
interpret this finding as evidence that adaptation is achieved by a gradual 
process, which progresses from small angles of output transformation through 
intermediate values up to the prescribed angle of rotation.

DOI: 10.1007/s002210100768
PMID: 11497067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


224. PLoS One. 2019 Dec 10;14(12):e0225925. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0225925. 
eCollection 2019.

Performance, complexity and dynamics of force maintenance and modulation in 
young and older adults.

Knol H(1)(2), Huys R(3), Temprado JJ(1), Sleimen-Malkoun R(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut des Sciences du Mouvement, Centre National de la Recherche 
Scientifique (CNRS), Aix-Marseille Université, Marseille, France.
(2)Department of Applied Cognitive Psychology, Universität Ulm, Ulm, Germany.
(3)Centre de Recherche Cerveau & Cognition, UPS, CHU Purpan, Université de 
Toulouse, Toulouse, France.

The present study addresses how task constraints and aging influence isometric 
force control. We used two tasks requiring either force maintenance (straight 
line target force) or force modulation (sine-wave target force) around different 
force levels and at different modulation frequencies. Force levels were defined 
relative the individual maximum voluntary contraction. A group of young adults 
(mean age ± SD = 25 ± 3.6 years) and a group of elderly (mean age = 77 ± 6.4 
years) took part in the study. Age- and task-related effects were assessed 
through differences in: (i) force control accuracy, (ii) time-structure of force 
fluctuations, and (iii) the contribution of deterministic (predictable) and 
stochastic (noise-like) dynamic components to the expressed behavior. 
Performance-wise, the elderly showed a pervasive lower accuracy and higher 
variability than the young participants. The analysis of fluctuations showed 
that the elderly produced force signals that were less complex than those of the 
young adults during the maintenance task, but the reverse was observed in the 
modulation task. Behavioral complexity results suggest a reduced adaptability to 
task-constraints with advanced age. Regarding the dynamics, we found comparable 
generating mechanisms in both age groups for both tasks and in all conditions, 
namely a fixed-point for force maintenance and a limit-cycle for force 
modulation. However, aging increased the stochasticity (noise-driven 
fluctuations) of force fluctuations in the cyclic force modulation, which could 
be related to the increased complexity found in elderly for this same task. To 
our knowledge this is the first time that these different perspectives to motor 
control are used simultaneously to characterize force control capacities. Our 
findings show their complementarity in revealing distinct aspects of 
sensorimotor adaptation to task constraints and age-related declines. Although 
further research is still needed to identify the physiological underpinnings, 
the used task and methodology are shown to have both fundamental and clinical 
applications.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0225925
PMCID: PMC6903729
PMID: 31821334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


225. Neuropsychologia. 2019 Sep;132:107121. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2019.107121. Epub 2019 Jun 12.

Does the motor system contribute to the perception of changes in objects visual 
attributes? The neural dynamics of sensory binding by action.

Wamain Y(1), Corveleyn X(2), Ott L(1), Coello Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Univ. Lille, CNRS, CHU Lille, UMR 9193 - SCALab - Sciences Cognitives et 
Sciences Affectives, F-59000, Lille, France.
(2)Université Côte d'Azur, LAPCOS, EA 7278, 06300, Nice, France.
(3)Univ. Lille, CNRS, CHU Lille, UMR 9193 - SCALab - Sciences Cognitives et 
Sciences Affectives, F-59000, Lille, France. Electronic address: 
yann.coello@univ-lille.fr.

The contribution of the motor system to perception has been highlighted in 
research investigating the effect of performing an action on the conscious 
processing of information received from the sensory systems. For example, the 
perceptual temporal asynchrony observed when passively reporting changes in 
visual object attributes (e.g., colour and position) was found to disappear 
virtually when the changes resulted from a voluntary motor action. Although the 
spatio-temporal constraints of sensory binding by action have been broadly 
investigated, the underlying neural correlates are still largely unknown. In the 
present study, participants performed temporal order judgments of changes in the 
colour and position of a visual stimulus, while adapting to a 750 ms delay 
between a sound (perceptual condition) or the end of a manual reaching action 
(motor condition), and the visual changes. Behavioural observations indicated 
that temporal asynchrony (-30.2 ms) decreased in the motor condition (2.7 ms), 
as a result of sensorimotor adaptation, but not in the perceptual condition 
(-29.6 ms). EEG-evoked potentials on posterior visual regions showed that early 
components were altered by sensorimotor adaptation, with in particular a broad 
reduction in the amplitude of the early P1 component. Furthermore, 
time-frequency analysis of EEG signals during the 350 ms period preceding the 
visual changes revealed an increase of the 15-25 Hz frequency band amplitude in 
the central region and a decrease of the 8-12 Hz frequency band amplitude in the 
posterior region. Overall the results suggest that sensory binding by action 
depends on an early top-down modulation of the visual regions by the motor 
system - in agreement with the pre-activation theory of action-perception 
coupling - associated with an increase of attentional resources.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2019.107121
PMID: 31199954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Brain Lang. 2018 Dec;187:92-103. doi: 10.1016/j.bandl.2018.01.008. Epub 2018 May 
7.

Auditory prediction during speaking and listening.

Sato M(1), Shiller DM(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire Parole et Langage, Aix-Marseille Université & CNRS, 
Aix-en-Provence, France; Brain and Language Research Institute, Aix-en-Provence, 
France.
(2)School of Speech-Language Pathology and Audiology, Université de Montréal, 
Canada; Sainte-Justine Hospital Research Centre, Montreal, Canada; Centre for 
Research on Brain, Language and Music, Montreal, Canada. Electronic address: 
douglas.shiller@umontreal.ca.

In the present EEG study, the role of auditory prediction in speech was explored 
through the comparison of auditory cortical responses during active speaking and 
passive listening to the same acoustic speech signals. Two manipulations of 
sensory prediction accuracy were used during the speaking task: (1) a real-time 
change in vowel F1 feedback (reducing prediction accuracy relative to unaltered 
feedback) and (2) presenting a stable auditory target rather than a visual cue 
to speak (enhancing auditory prediction accuracy during baseline productions, 
and potentially enhancing the perturbing effect of altered feedback). While 
subjects compensated for the F1 manipulation, no difference between the 
auditory-cue and visual-cue conditions were found. Under visually-cued 
conditions, reduced N1/P2 amplitude was observed during speaking vs. listening, 
reflecting a motor-to-sensory prediction. In addition, a significant correlation 
was observed between the magnitude of behavioral compensatory F1 response and 
the magnitude of this speaking induced suppression (SIS) for P2 during the 
altered auditory feedback phase, where a stronger compensatory decrease in F1 
was associated with a stronger the SIS effect. Finally, under the auditory-cued 
condition, an auditory repetition-suppression effect was observed in N1/P2 
amplitude during the listening task but not active speaking, suggesting that 
auditory predictive processes during speaking and passive listening are 
functionally distinct.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bandl.2018.01.008
PMCID: PMC6072625
PMID: 29402437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors declare no 
competing financial interests.


227. Neurology. 2006 Jun 27;66(12):1859-67. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000219614.33171.01.

Functional anatomy of the therapeutic effects of prism adaptation on left 
neglect.

Luauté J(1), Michel C, Rode G, Pisella L, Jacquin-Courtois S, Costes N, Cotton 
F, le Bars D, Boisson D, Halligan P, Rossetti Y.

Author information:
(1)INSERM Unité 534, Espace et Action, 16, Avenue du doyen Lépine, 69500 Bron, 
France.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the anatomic substrates underlying the beneficial 
effect of prism adaptation in five patients with persistent left neglect 
following right stroke.
METHODS: In a functional imaging PET study, we used a covariation analysis to 
examine linear changes of regional cerebral blood flow over sessions as a 
function of left neglect improvement.
RESULTS: The network of significant brain regions associated with improvement of 
left neglect performance produced by prism adaptation involved the right 
cerebellum, the left thalamus, the left temporo-occipital cortex, the left 
medial temporal cortex, and the right posterior parietal cortex.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that the realignment of visuomotor coordinates 
is processed by the cerebellum and that low level sensorimotor adaptation 
actively modulates cerebral areas, albeit now relying on intact 
cerebellocerebral connections. Hence, our data support the hypothesis that the 
beneficial effect of prism adaptation on the clinical presentation of left 
neglect derives from modulation of cortical regions implicated in spatial 
cognition.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000219614.33171.01
PMID: 16801651 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Exerc Sport Sci Rev. 2010 Jan;38(1):3-9. doi: 10.1097/JES.0b013e3181c5cce7.

Neural correlates of motor learning, transfer of learning, and learning to 
learn.

Seidler RD(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Michigan, Department of Psychology and School of Kinesiology, 
Ann Arbor, 48109-2214, United States. rseidler@umich.edu

Recent studies on the neural bases of sensorimotor adaptation demonstrate that 
the cerebellar and striatal thalamocortical pathways contribute to early 
learning. Transfer of learning involves a reduction in the contribution of early 
learning networks and increased reliance on the cerebellum. The neural 
correlates of learning to learn remain to be determined but likely involve 
enhanced functioning of the general aspects of early learning.

DOI: 10.1097/JES.0b013e3181c5cce7
PMCID: PMC2796204
PMID: 20016293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Commun Biol. 2018 Mar 22;1:19. doi: 10.1038/s42003-018-0021-y. eCollection 2018.

Invariant errors reveal limitations in motor correction rather than constraints 
on error sensitivity.

Kim HE(1)(2), Morehead JR(3), Parvin DE(4)(5), Moazzezi R(6), Ivry RB(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, 
94720, USA. hyosubkim@berkeley.edu.
(2)Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA, 94720, USA. hyosubkim@berkeley.edu.
(3)John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard 
University, Cambridge, MA, 02138, USA.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, 
94720, USA.
(5)Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA, 94720, USA.
(6)Independent Investigator, Berkeley, CA, 94720, USA.

Implicit sensorimotor adaptation is traditionally described as a process of 
error reduction, whereby a fraction of the error is corrected for with each 
movement. Here, in our study of healthy human participants, we characterize two 
constraints on this learning process: the size of adaptive corrections is only 
related to error size when errors are smaller than 6°, and learning functions 
converge to a similar level of asymptotic learning over a wide range of error 
sizes. These findings are problematic for current models of sensorimotor 
adaptation, and point to a new theoretical perspective in which learning is 
constrained by the size of the error correction, rather than sensitivity to 
error.

DOI: 10.1038/s42003-018-0021-y
PMCID: PMC6123629
PMID: 30271906

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


230. eNeuro. 2021 Feb 25:ENEURO.0190-20.2021. doi: 10.1523/ENEURO.0190-20.2021. 
Online ahead of print.

Interlimb transfer of reach adaptation does not require an intact corpus 
callosum:Evidence from patients with callosal lesions and agenesis.

Tilsley PA(1), Romaiguère P(1), Tramoni E(2)(3), Felician O(2)(3), Sarlegna 
FR(4).

Author information:
(1)Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, ISM, Marseille, France.
(2)Aix Marseille Univ, INSERM, INS, Inst Neurosci Syst, Marseille, France.
(3)APHM, CHU de la Timone, Service de Neurologie et Neuropsychologie, Marseille, 
France.
(4)Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, ISM, Marseille, France 
fabrice.sarlegna@univ-amu.fr.

Generalization of sensorimotor adaptation across limbs, known as interlimb 
transfer, is a well-demonstrated phenomenon in humans, yet the underlying neural 
mechanisms remain unclear. Theoretical models suggest that interlimb transfer is 
mediated by interhemispheric transfer of information via the corpus callosum. We 
thus hypothesized that lesions of the corpus callosum, especially to its midbody 
connecting motor, supplementary motor and premotor areas of the two cerebral 
hemispheres, would impair interlimb transfer of sensorimotor adaptation. To test 
this hypothesis, we recruited three patients: two rare stroke patients with 
recent, extensive callosal lesions including the midbody and one patient with 
complete agenesis. A prismatic adaptation paradigm involving unconstrained arm 
reaching movements was designed to assess interlimb transfer from the 
prism-exposed dominant arm to the unexposed non-dominant arm for each 
participant. Baseline results showed that spatial performance of each patient 
did not significantly differ from controls, for both limbs. Further, each 
patient adapted to the prismatic perturbation, with no significant difference in 
error reduction compared to controls. Crucially, interlimb transfer was found in 
each patient. The absolute magnitude of each patient's transfer did not 
significantly differ from controls. These findings show that sensorimotor 
adaptation can transfer across limbs despite extensive lesions or complete 
absence of the corpus callosum. Therefore, callosal pathways connecting 
homologous motor, premotor and supplementary motor areas are not necessary for 
interlimb transfer of prismatic reach adaptation. Such interlimb transfer could 
be mediated by transcallosal splenium pathways connecting parietal, temporal and 
visual areas, ipsilateral cortico-spinal pathways or subcortical structures such 
as the cerebellum.Significance Statement Theoretical models suggest that 
interlimb transfer of sensorimotor adaptation is mediated by interhemispheric 
interactions via the corpus callosum, specifically between motor cortices. We 
thus hypothesized that interlimb transfer of prism adaptation in a reaching task 
would be impaired in patients with callosal abnormalities, especially those 
affecting midbody pathways connecting the motor cortices. Contrarily, we found 
interlimb transfer in each patient, to a level comparable to that of controls. 
Our findings show that callosal pathways connecting motor, premotor and 
supplementary motor areas are not necessary for the interlimb transfer of 
prismatic reach adaptation. Alternatively, this transfer could be mediated by 
ipsilateral cortico-spinal pathways, subcortical structures such as the 
cerebellum or callosal splenium pathways connecting parietal, temporal and 
visual areas.

Copyright © 2021 Tilsley et al.

DOI: 10.1523/ENEURO.0190-20.2021
PMID: 33632816

Conflict of interest statement: Authors report no conflict of interest.


231. Eura Medicophys. 2007 Jun;43(2):255-69.

Rehabilitation of unilateral spatial neglect and neuroimaging.

Arene NU(1), Hillis AE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD 21239, USA. narene1@jhmi.edu

We review the literature on current knowledge of the role of unilateral spatial 
neglect as an independent predictor of poor functional outcome after right brain 
injury, the neural mechanisms and neural substrates that are responsible for the 
manifestation of neglect behaviors, and the available rehabilitation techniques 
for neglect amelioration. We focus on the neuroimaging correlates of these 
rehabilitation techniques and rehabilitation amelioration, their mode of action 
and their potential to make a difference in functional outcomes, by assessing 
their potential to improve patients' performance in activities of daily living. 
We recognize that there is no consensus on efficacious treatments for neglect 
rehabilitation, and acknowledge that the lack of complete clarity of the neural 
substrates and mechanisms underlying neglect phenomena may hinder the 
development of efficacious rehabilitation techniques. We discuss current 
opinions on the neural mechanisms of hemispatial neglect and delved into the 
neural substrates of neglect based on functional and structural imaging. We 
explore the role of damage or dysfunction within specific right hemisphere 
structures in generating certain neglect subtypes and discussed how such 
knowledge may guide treatments for the rehabilitation of unilateral neglect. 
From this foundation, we proceed to explore the available rehabilitation 
techniques for neglect amelioration and how neuroimaging may guide the choice of 
therapies for different forms of unilateral neglect. We discuss cognitive 
rehabilitation approaches which form the bedrock of most traditional 
rehabilitation programs and follow with a description of other available, but 
less well utilized methods of neglect rehabilitation, including sensory 
stimulation, sensorimotor adaptation to visual perturbations by prism 
adaptation, and pharmacological agents (mainly dopamine agonists) that might 
augment rehabilitation. We also discuss the efficacy of these techniques in 
neglect rehabilitation and compare the potential of these diverse techniques to 
ameliorate not only the different symptoms of neglect, but also the different 
subtypes of neglect. Finally, we make suggestions about future research that 
could enhance the rehabilitation of neglect.

PMID: 17589416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Curr Biol. 2016 Apr 25;26(8):1062-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2016.02.030. Epub 2016 
Mar 31.

Enhanced Muscle Afferent Signals during Motor Learning in Humans.

Dimitriou M(1).

Author information:
(1)Physiology Section, Department of Integrative Medical Biology, University of 
Umeå, 901 87 Umeå, Sweden. Electronic address: mdimitriou@umu.se.

Much has been revealed concerning human motor learning at the behavioral level 
[1, 2], but less is known about changes in the involved neural circuits and 
signals. By examining muscle spindle responses during a classic visuomotor 
adaptation task [3-6] performed by fully alert humans, I found substantial 
modulation of sensory afferent signals as a function of adaptation state. 
Specifically, spindle control was independent of concurrent muscle activity 
but was specific to movement direction (representing muscle lengthening versus 
shortening) and to different stages of learning. Increased spindle afferent 
responses to muscle stretch occurring early during learning reflected individual 
error size and were negatively related to subsequent antagonist activity (i.e., 
60-80 ms thereafter). Relative increases in tonic afferent output early during 
learning were predictive of the subjects' adaptation rate. I also found that 
independent spindle control during sensory realignment (the "washout" stage) 
induced afferent signal "linearization" with respect to muscle length (i.e., 
signals were more tuned to hand position). The results demonstrate for the first 
time that motor learning also involves independent and state-related modulation 
of sensory mechanoreceptor signals. The current findings suggest that adaptive 
motor performance also relies on the independent control of sensors, not just of 
muscles. I propose that the "γ" motor system innervating spindles acts to 
facilitate the acquisition and extraction of task-relevant information at the 
early stages of sensorimotor adaptation. This designates a more active and 
targeted role for the human proprioceptive system during motor learning.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2016.02.030
PMID: 27040776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Psychon Bull Rev. 2021 Jan 22. doi: 10.3758/s13423-020-01865-x. Online ahead of 
print.

Prolonged response time helps eliminate residual errors in visuomotor 
adaptation.

Langsdorf L(1)(2)(3), Maresch J(4), Hegele M(5)(6), McDougle SD(#)(7), Schween 
R(#)(5)(8).

Author information:
(1)NemoLab - Neuromotor Behavior Laboratory, Department of Sport Science, Justus 
Liebig University, Giessen, Germany. Lisa.Langsdorf@sport.uni-giessen.de.
(2)Center for Mind, Brain and Behavior (CMBB), Universities of Marburg and 
Giessen, Giessen, Germany. Lisa.Langsdorf@sport.uni-giessen.de.
(3)Department of Psychology and Sport Science, Justus Liebig Unversity, Giessen, 
Germany. Lisa.Langsdorf@sport.uni-giessen.de.
(4)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the 
Negev, Beersheva, Israel.
(5)NemoLab - Neuromotor Behavior Laboratory, Department of Sport Science, Justus 
Liebig University, Giessen, Germany.
(6)Center for Mind, Brain and Behavior (CMBB), Universities of Marburg and 
Giessen, Giessen, Germany.
(7)Department of Psychology, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.
(8)Department of Psychology, Philipps-University, Marburg, Germany.
(#)Contributed equally

One persistent curiosity in visuomotor adaptation tasks is that participants 
often do not reach maximal performance. This incomplete asymptote has been 
explained as a consequence of obligatory computations within the implicit 
adaptation system, such as an equilibrium between learning and forgetting. A 
body of recent work has shown that in standard adaptation tasks, cognitive 
strategies operate alongside implicit learning. We reasoned that incomplete 
learning in adaptation tasks may primarily reflect a speed-accuracy tradeoff on 
time-consuming motor planning. Across three experiments, we find evidence 
supporting this hypothesis, showing that hastened motor planning may primarily 
lead to under-compensation. When an obligatory waiting period was administered 
before movement start, participants were able to fully counteract imposed 
perturbations (Experiment 1). Inserting the same delay between trials - rather 
than during movement planning - did not induce full compensation, suggesting 
that the motor planning interval influences the learning asymptote (Experiment 
2). In the last experiment (Experiment 3), we asked participants to continuously 
report their movement intent. We show that emphasizing explicit re-aiming 
strategies (and concomitantly increasing planning time) also lead to complete 
asymptotic learning. Findings from all experiments support the hypothesis that 
incomplete adaptation is, in part, the result of an intrinsic speed-accuracy 
tradeoff, perhaps related to cognitive strategies that require parametric 
attentional reorienting from the visual target to the goal.

DOI: 10.3758/s13423-020-01865-x
PMID: 33483935


234. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2009;629:221-42. doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-77064-2_11.

Learning from learning: what can visuomotor adaptations tell us about the 
neuronal representation of movement?

Paz R(1), Vaadia E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel. 
rony.paz@weizmann.ac.il

The use of sensorimotor adaptation and learning paradigms in psychophyical and 
electrophysiological experiments can help to shed light on two fundamental 
questions. First, what are the computations that control sensorimotor behavior 
and, second, what are the neuronal mechanisms and representations underlying 
newly learned sensorimotor skills? We describe experiments that combined 
behavioral and electrophysioloigcal techniques and discuss implication of the 
results to three main questions: How do neuronal primitives of representation 
affect performance and learning? Do pre-motor and primary motor cortices form a 
hierarchy of computation, with different roles during learning and motor 
performance? How do these different cortical areas and the representations of 
movement change during the different stages of learning and memory formation?

DOI: 10.1007/978-0-387-77064-2_11
PMID: 19227502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Front Psychol. 2013 Jun 21;4:340. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00340. eCollection 
2013.

Prediction and imitation in speech.

Gambi C(1), Pickering MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Edinburgh Edinburgh, UK.

It has been suggested that intra- and inter-speaker variability in speech are 
correlated. Interlocutors have been shown to converge on various phonetic 
dimensions. In addition, speakers imitate the phonetic properties of voices they 
are exposed to in shadowing, repetition, and even passive listening tasks. We 
review three theoretical accounts of speech imitation and convergence phenomena: 
(i) the Episodic Theory (ET) of speech perception and production (Goldinger, 
1998); (ii) the Motor Theory (MT) of speech perception (Liberman and Whalen, 
2000; Galantucci et al., 2006); (iii) Communication Accommodation Theory (CAT; 
Giles and Coupland, 1991; Giles et al., 1991). We argue that no account is able 
to explain all the available evidence. In particular, there is a need to 
integrate low-level, mechanistic accounts (like ET and MT), and higher-level 
accounts (like CAT). We propose that this is possible within the framework of an 
integrated theory of production and comprehension (Pickering and Garrod, 2013). 
Similarly to both ET and MT, this theory assumes parity between production and 
perception. Uniquely, however, it posits that listeners simulate speakers' 
utterances by computing forward-model predictions at many different levels, 
which are then compared to the incoming phonetic input. In our account phonetic 
imitation can be achieved via the same mechanism that is responsible for 
sensorimotor adaptation; i.e., the correction of prediction errors. In addition, 
the model assumes that the degree to which sensory prediction errors lead to 
motor adjustments is context-dependent. The notion of context subsumes both the 
preceding linguistic input and non-linguistic attributes of the situation (e.g., 
the speaker's and listener's social identities, their conversational roles, the 
listener's intention to imitate).

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00340
PMCID: PMC3689255
PMID: 23801971


236. Vision Res. 2021 Jan;178:1-11. doi: 10.1016/j.visres.2020.09.007. Epub 2020 Oct 
15.

Persistent grasping errors produce depth cue reweighting in perception.

Cesanek E(1), Taylor JA(2), Domini F(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive, Linguistic, & Psychological Sciences, Brown 
University, Providence, RI, United States. Electronic address: 
eac2257@columbia.edu.
(2)Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, United States.
(3)Department of Cognitive, Linguistic, & Psychological Sciences, Brown 
University, Providence, RI, United States.

When a grasped object is larger or smaller than expected, haptic feedback 
automatically recalibrates motor planning. Intriguingly, haptic feedback can 
also affect 3D shape perception through a process called depth cue reweighting. 
Although signatures of cue reweighting also appear in motor behavior, it is 
unclear whether this motor reweighting is the result of upstream perceptual 
reweighting, or a separate process. We propose that perceptual reweighting is 
directly related to motor control; in particular, that it is caused by 
persistent, systematic movement errors that cannot be resolved by motor 
recalibration alone. In Experiment 1, we inversely varied texture and stereo 
cues to create a set of depth-metamer objects: when texture specified a deep 
object, stereo specified a shallow object, and vice versa, such that all objects 
appeared equally deep. The stereo-texture pairings that produced this perceptual 
metamerism were determined for each participant in a matching task (Pre-test). 
Next, participants repeatedly grasped these depth metamers, receiving haptic 
feedback that was positively correlated with one cue and negatively correlated 
with the other, resulting in persistent movement errors. Finally, participants 
repeated the perceptual matching task (Post-test). In the condition where haptic 
feedback reinforced the texture cue, perceptual changes were correlated with 
changes in grasping performance across individuals, demonstrating a link between 
perceptual reweighting and improved motor control. Experiment 2 showed that cue 
reweighting does not occur when movement errors are rapidly corrected by 
standard motor adaptation. These findings suggest a mutual dependency between 
perception and action, with perception directly guiding action, and actions 
producing error signals that drive motor and perceptual learning.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.visres.2020.09.007
PMID: 33070029


237. J Speech Lang Hear Res. 2017 Jun 10;60(6):1545-1550. doi: 
10.1044/2017_JSLHR-S-16-0282.

Evidence for Auditory-Motor Impairment in Individuals With Hyperfunctional Voice 
Disorders.

Stepp CE(1), Lester-Smith RA(2), Abur D(2), Daliri A(2), Pieter Noordzij J(3), 
Lupiani AA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Speech, Language, and Hearing Sciences, Boston University, 
MassachusettsDepartment of Biomedical Engineering, Boston University, 
MassachusettsDepartment of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Boston 
University School of Medicine, Massachusetts.
(2)Department of Speech, Language, and Hearing Sciences, Boston University, 
Massachusetts.
(3)Department of Speech, Language, and Hearing Sciences, Boston University, 
MassachusettsDepartment of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Boston 
University School of Medicine, Massachusetts.

PURPOSE: The vocal auditory-motor control of individuals with hyperfunctional 
voice disorders was examined using a sensorimotor adaptation paradigm.
METHOD: Nine individuals with hyperfunctional voice disorders and 9 individuals 
with typical voices produced sustained vowels over 160 trials in 2 separate 
conditions: (a) while experiencing gradual upward perturbations in the 
fundamental frequency (fo) of their auditory feedback (shift-up) and (b) under 
no auditory perturbation (control). The shift-up condition consisted of 4 
ordered (fixed) phases: baseline (no perturbation), ramp (gradual increases in 
heard fo), hold (a consistently higher heard fo), and after-effect (no 
perturbation). Adaptive responses were defined as the difference in produced fo 
during control and shift-up conditions.
RESULTS: Adaptive responses were significantly different between groups. 
Individuals with typical voices generally showed compensatory adaptive 
responses, with decreased fo during the ramp and hold phases. Conversely, many 
individuals with hyperfunctional voice disorders instead displayed the opposite 
effect by following the direction of the perturbation. When fo was 
experimentally increased, speakers further increased their fo.
CONCLUSION: Results indicate that some individuals diagnosed with 
hyperfunctional voice disorders have disrupted auditory-motor control, 
suggesting atypical neurological function. These findings may eventually allow 
for the development of new interventions for hyperfunctional voice disorders.

DOI: 10.1044/2017_JSLHR-S-16-0282
PMCID: PMC5544411
PMID: 28590007 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Exp Brain Res. 2016 Jun;234(6):1385-94. doi: 10.1007/s00221-015-4542-z. Epub 
2016 Jan 9.

Emotion and reward are dissociable from error during motor learning.

Festini SB(1)(2), Preston SD(3), Reuter-Lorenz PA(3), Seidler RD(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, 530 Church St., Ann Arbor, 
MI, 48109, USA. sara.festini@utdallas.edu.
(2)Center for Vital Longevity, University of Texas at Dallas, 1600 Viceroy Drive 
Suite 800, Dallas, TX, 75235, USA. sara.festini@utdallas.edu.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, 530 Church St., Ann Arbor, 
MI, 48109, USA.
(4)School of Kinesiology, University of Michigan, 401 Washtenaw Ave., Ann Arbor, 
MI, 48109, USA.

Although emotion is known to reciprocally interact with cognitive and motor 
performance, contemporary theories of motor learning do not specifically 
consider how dynamic variations in a learner's affective state may influence 
motor performance during motor learning. Using a prism adaptation paradigm, we 
assessed emotion during motor learning on a trial-by-trial basis. We designed 
two dart-throwing experiments to dissociate motor performance and reward 
outcomes by giving participants maximum points for accurate throws and reduced 
points for throws that hit zones away from the target (i.e., "accidental 
points"). Experiment 1 dissociated motor performance from emotional responses 
and found that affective ratings tracked points earned more closely than error 
magnitude. Further, both reward and error uniquely contributed to motor 
learning, as indexed by the change in error from one trial to the next. 
Experiment 2 manipulated accidental point locations vertically, whereas prism 
displacement remained horizontal. Results demonstrated that reward could bias 
motor performance even when concurrent sensorimotor adaptation was taking place 
in a perpendicular direction. Thus, these experiments demonstrate that affective 
states were dissociable from error magnitude during motor learning and that 
affect more closely tracked points earned. Our findings further implicate reward 
as another factor, other than error, that contributes to motor learning, 
suggesting the importance of incorporating affective states into models of motor 
learning.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-015-4542-z
PMID: 26746312 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Psychophysiology. 2020 May;57(5):e13545. doi: 10.1111/psyp.13545. Epub 2020 Feb 
13.

Real-time biofeedback integrated into neuromuscular training reduces high-risk 
knee biomechanics and increases functional brain connectivity: A preliminary 
longitudinal investigation.

Diekfuss JA(1), Grooms DR(2)(3), Bonnette S(1), DiCesare CA(1), Thomas S(1), 
MacPherson RP(1)(3), Ellis JD(1)(4), Kiefer AW(1)(5)(6), Riley MA(6), Schneider 
DK(7), Gadd B(1), Kitchen K(1), Barber Foss KD(1), Dudley JA(8), Yuan W(4)(8), 
Myer GD(1)(4)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)The SPORT Center, Division of Sports Medicine, Cincinnati Children's Hospital 
Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(2)Ohio Musculoskeletal & Neurological Institute, Ohio University, Athens, OH, 
USA.
(3)Division of Athletic Training, School of Applied Health Sciences and 
Wellness, College of Health Sciences and Professions, Ohio University, Athens, 
OH, USA.
(4)College of Medicine, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(5)Department of Exercise Science and Sport Science, University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(6)Center for Cognition, Action & Perception, Department of Psychology, 
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(7)Department of Radiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(8)Pediatric Neuroimaging Research Consortium, Cincinnati Children's Hospital 
Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(9)Department of Pediatrics and Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Cincinnati, 
Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(10)The Micheli Center for Sports Injury Prevention, Waltham, MA, USA.

Prospective evidence indicates that functional biomechanics and brain 
connectivity may predispose an athlete to an anterior cruciate ligament injury, 
revealing novel neural linkages for targeted neuromuscular training 
interventions. The purpose of this study was to determine the efficacy of a 
real-time biofeedback system for altering knee biomechanics and brain functional 
connectivity. Seventeen healthy, young, physically active female athletes 
completed 6 weeks of augmented neuromuscular training (aNMT) utilizing 
real-time, interactive visual biofeedback and 13 served as untrained controls. A 
drop vertical jump and resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging were 
separately completed at pre- and posttest time points to assess sensorimotor 
adaptation. The aNMT group had a significant reduction in peak knee abduction 
moment (pKAM) compared to controls (p = .03, d = 0.71). The aNMT group also 
exhibited a significant increase in functional connectivity between the right 
supplementary motor area and the left thalamus (p = .0473 after false discovery 
rate correction). Greater percent change in pKAM was also related to increased 
connectivity between the right cerebellum and right thalamus for the aNMT group 
(p = .0292 after false discovery rate correction, r2  = .62). No significant 
changes were observed for the controls (ps > .05). Our data provide preliminary 
evidence of potential neural mechanisms for aNMT-induced motor adaptations that 
reduce injury risk. Future research is warranted to understand the role of 
neuromuscular training alone and how each component of aNMT influences 
biomechanics and functional connectivity.

© 2020 Society for Psychophysiological Research.

DOI: 10.1111/psyp.13545
PMCID: PMC7160050
PMID: 32052868

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement: Gregory D. Myer 
consults with Commercial entities to support application to the US Food and Drug 
Administration but has no financial interest in the commercialization of the 
products. Dr. Myer’s institution receives current and ongoing grant funding from 
National Institutes of Health/NIAMS Grants U01AR067997, R01 AR070474, and 
industry sponsored research funding related to brain injury prevention and 
assessment with Q30 Innovations, LLC, and ElMinda, Ltd. Dr. Myer receives author 
royalties from Human Kinetics and Wolters Kluwer. Dr. Riley’s institution 
receives current and ongoing grant funding from National Institutes of 
Health/NIAMS grant U01AR067997 and NIH/NIDCD grant 1R01DC017301–01. Dr. Riley 
receives royalties from Springer-Verlag. Drs. Myer, Kiefer and Riley are also an 
inventors of biofeedback technologies (2017 Non Provisional Patent Pending- 
Augmented and Virtual reality for Sport Performance and Injury Prevention 
Application filed 11/10/2016 (62/420,119), Software Copyrighted.) designed to 
enhance rehabilitation and prevent injuries and has potential for future 
licensing royalties. Scott Bonnette, Christopher A. DiCesare, Ryan P. 
MacPherson, Staci Thomas, Brooke Gaad, Kim D. Barber Foss, Katie Kitchen, Dustin 
R. Grooms, and Jed A. Diekfuss are contributors to the implementation of the 
biofeedback technology to which the inventors have allocated a portion of the 
inventor’s share of potential royalties from licensing of technology.


240. Annu Int Conf IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2012;2012:3584-7. doi: 
10.1109/EMBC.2012.6346741.

Training complexity is not decisive factor for improving adaptation to visual 
sensory conflict.

Yang Y(1), Pu F, Li S, Li Y, Li D, Fan Y.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory for Biomechanics and Mechanobiology, Ministry of Education, 
School of Biological Science and Medical Engineering, Beihang University, 
Beijing, China. yy860415@be.buaa.edu.cn

Ground-based preflight training utilizing unusual visual stimuli is useful for 
decreasing the susceptibility to space motion sickness (SMS). The effectiveness 
of the sensorimotor adaptation training is affected by the training tasks, but 
what kind of task is more effective remains unknown. Whether the complexity is 
the decisive factor to consider for designing the training and if other factors 
are more important need to be analyzed. The results from the analysis can help 
to optimize the preflight training tasks for astronauts. Twenty right-handed 
subjects were asked to draw the right path of 45° rotated maze before and after 
30 min training. Subjects wore an up-down reversing prism spectacle in test and 
training sessions. Two training tasks were performed: drawing the right path of 
the horizontal maze (complex task but with different orientation feature) and 
drawing the L-shape lines (easy task with same orientation feature). The error 
rate and the executing time were measured during the test. Paired samples t test 
was used to compare the effects of the two training tasks. After each training, 
the error rate and the executing time were significantly decreased. However, the 
training effectiveness of the easy task was better as the test was finished more 
quickly and accurately. The complexity is not always the decisive factor for 
designing the adaptation training task, e.g. the orientation feature is more 
important in this study. In order to accelerate the adaptation and to counter 
SMS, the task for astronauts preflight adaptation training could be simple 
activities with the key features.

DOI: 10.1109/EMBC.2012.6346741
PMID: 23366702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Neurophysiol. 2015 Mar 15;113(6):1885-95. doi: 10.1152/jn.00369.2014. Epub 
2014 Dec 10.

Visuomotor adaptation to a visual rotation is gravity dependent.

Toma S(1), Sciutti A(2), Papaxanthis C(3), Pozzo T(4).

Author information:
(1)Centre of Space Bio-medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy; 
Laboratory of Neuromotor Physiology, IRCCS Santa Lucia Foundation, Rome, Italy;
(2)Department of Robotics, Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Fondazione Istituto 
Italiano di Tecnologia, Genoa, Italy;
(3)Unité 1093, Cognition, Action et Plasticité Sensorimotrice, Institut National 
de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), UFR STAPS, Dijon, France; and.
(4)Department of Robotics, Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Fondazione Istituto 
Italiano di Tecnologia, Genoa, Italy; Unité 1093, Cognition, Action et 
Plasticité Sensorimotrice, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche 
Médicale (INSERM), UFR STAPS, Dijon, France; and Institut Universitaire de 
France (IUF), Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France 
thierry.pozzo@u-bourgogne.fr.

Humans perform vertical and horizontal arm motions with different temporal 
patterns. The specific velocity profiles are chosen by the central nervous 
system by integrating the gravitational force field to minimize energy 
expenditure. However, what happens when a visuomotor rotation is applied, so 
that a motion performed in the horizontal plane is perceived as vertical? We 
investigated the dynamic of the adaptation of the spatial and temporal 
properties of a pointing motion during prolonged exposure to a 90° visuomotor 
rotation, where a horizontal movement was associated with a vertical visual 
feedback. We found that participants immediately adapted the spatial parameters 
of motion to the conflicting visual scene in order to keep their arm trajectory 
straight. In contrast, the initial symmetric velocity profiles specific for a 
horizontal motion were progressively modified during the conflict exposure, 
becoming more asymmetric and similar to those appropriate for a vertical motion. 
Importantly, this visual effect that increased with repetitions was not followed 
by a consistent aftereffect when the conflicting visual feedback was absent 
(catch and washout trials). In a control experiment we demonstrated that an 
intrinsic representation of the temporal structure of perceived vertical motions 
could provide the error signal allowing for this progressive adaptation of 
motion timing. These findings suggest that gravity strongly constrains motor 
learning and the reweighting process between visual and proprioceptive sensory 
inputs, leading to the selection of a motor plan that is suboptimal in terms of 
energy expenditure.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00369.2014
PMID: 25505105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Acta Psychol (Amst). 2017 Feb;173:106-115. doi: 10.1016/j.actpsy.2016.12.009. 
Epub 2016 Dec 29.

Visuomotor adaptability in older adults with mild cognitive decline.

Schaffert J(1), Lee CM(2), Neill R(3), Bo J(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Eastern Michigan University, Ypsilanti, MI 48197, 
United States; Department of Psychiatry, University of Texas Southwestern 
Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, United States.
(2)Department of Psychology, Eastern Michigan University, Ypsilanti, MI 48197, 
United States; Division of Clinical Behavioral Neuroscience, Department of 
Pediatrics, University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, MN 55455, 
United States.
(3)Department of Psychology, Eastern Michigan University, Ypsilanti, MI 48197, 
United States; School of Medicine, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48202, 
United States.
(4)Department of Psychology, Eastern Michigan University, Ypsilanti, MI 48197, 
United States; School of Physical Education, Central China Normal University, Wu 
Han, PR China; Center for Human Growth and Development, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, MI 48109, United States. Electronic address: jbo@emich.edu.

The current study examined the augmentation of error feedback on visuomotor 
adaptability in older adults with varying degrees of cognitive decline (assessed 
by the Montreal Cognitive Assessment; MoCA). Twenty-three participants performed 
a center-out computerized visuomotor adaptation task when the visual feedback of 
their hand movement error was presented in a regular (ratio=1:1) or enhanced 
(ratio=1:2) error feedback schedule. Results showed that older adults with lower 
scores on the MoCA had less adaptability than those with higher MoCA scores 
during the regular feedback schedule. However, participants demonstrated similar 
adaptability during the enhanced feedback schedule, regardless of their 
cognitive ability. Furthermore, individuals with lower MoCA scores showed larger 
after-effects in spatial control during the enhanced schedule compared to the 
regular schedule, whereas individuals with higher MoCA scores displayed the 
opposite pattern. Additional neuro-cognitive assessments revealed that spatial 
working memory and processing speed were positively related to motor 
adaptability during the regular scheduled but negatively related to adaptability 
during the enhanced schedule. We argue that individuals with mild cognitive 
decline employed different adaptation strategies when encountering enhanced 
visual feedback, suggesting older adults with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) 
may benefit from enhanced visual error feedback during sensorimotor adaptation.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actpsy.2016.12.009
PMID: 28039795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Hum Mov Sci. 2010 Apr;29(2):179-86. doi: 10.1016/j.humov.2010.02.002. Epub 2010 
Mar 24.

Is sensorimotor adaptation to position- and velocity-dependent visual 
distortions based on distinct adaptive processes?

Thomas M(1), Bock O.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Physiology and Anatomy, German Sport University, Am Sportpark 
Müngersdorf 6, 50933 Cologne, Germany. thomas@dshs-koeln.de 
<thomas@dshs-koeln.de>

It is widely held that sensorimotor adaptation to different distortions is 
brought about by separate, distortion-specific processes which compete for the 
limited resources of short-term motor memory when they are activated in close 
temporal succession. Here we scrutinized this view by exposing participants 
sequentially to two distortions of equal or of opposite polarity, one 
proportional to the position, and the other to the velocity of their hand. We 
found movement errors to be largest in participants who were pre-adapted to a 
distortion of different type and opposite polarity, smaller in novice 
participants, and smaller still in participants who were pre-adapted to a 
distortion of different type and same polarity. The interference observed with 
opposite-polarity distortions can be explained by the existence of competing, 
independent, or cooperative adaptive processes. However, the facilitation 
observed with equal-polarity distortions is in quantitative disagreement with 
the competing- and independent-processes view, but is consistent with the 
cooperative-processes view. We therefore conclude that adaptation to position- 
and velocity-dependent visual distortions can be based on cooperative processes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humov.2010.02.002
PMID: 20338653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Acta Astronaut. 2001 Aug-Nov;49(3-10):199-213. doi: 
10.1016/s0094-5765(01)00099-6.

Motor coordination in weightless conditions revealed by long-term microgravity 
adaptation.

Baroni G(1), Pedrocchi A, Ferrigno G, Massion J, Pedotti A.

Author information:
(1)Bioengineering Department, Politecnico di Milano University, P.zza Leonardo 
da Vinci 32, I-20133 Milano.

The functional approach to studying human motor systems attempts to give a 
better understanding of the processes behind planning movements and their 
coordinated performance by relying on weightlessness as a particularly 
enlightening experimental condition. Indeed, quantitative monitoring of 
sensorimotor adaptation of subjects exposed to weightlessness outlines the 
functional role of gravity in motor and postural organization. The recent 
accessibility of the MIR Space Station has allowed for the first time 
experimental quantitative kinematic analysis of long-term sensorimotor and 
postural adaptation to the weightless environment though opto-electronic 
techniques. In the frame of the EUROMIR'95 Mission, two protocols of voluntary 
posture perturbation (erect posture, EP; forward trunk bending, FTB) were 
carried out during four months of microgravity exposure. Results show that 
postural strategies for quasistatic body orientation in weightlessness are based 
on the alignment of geometrical body axes (head and trunk) along external 
references. A proper whole body positioning appears to be recovered only after 
months of microgravity exposure. By contrast, typically, terrestrial strategies 
of co-ordination between movement and posture are promptly restored and used 
when performing motor activities in the weightless environment. This result is 
explained under the assumption that there may be different sensorimotor 
integration processes for static and dynamic postural function and that the 
organisation of coordinated movement might rely stably on egocentric references 
and kinematics synergies for motor control.

c 2001. Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/s0094-5765(01)00099-6
PMID: 11669110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Aviat Space Environ Med. 2003 Dec;74(12):1256-62.

Sensorimotor performance and computational demand during short-term exposure to 
microgravity.

Bock O(1), Abeele S, Eversheim U.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Physiology, German Sport University, Köln, Germany. 
bock@dshs-koeln.de

INTRODUCTION: Previous research suggests that human sensorimotor performance 
depends both on task difficulty, and on the allocation of the brain's 
computational resources to the task. We employ this view to analyze the changes 
of sensorimotor performance during the microgravity episodes of parabolic 
flight.
METHODS: There were seven subjects who participated before, during, and after 
exposure to the microgravity episodes of parabolic flight. They performed a 
tracking task with one hand, and a four-choice reaction time task with the other 
hand, either alone or concurrently. Overall performance scores across tasks were 
calculated.
RESULTS: Overall single-task performance deteriorated by about 50% microgravity, 
with little sign of recovery during the flight. Overall dual-task interference 
was more than twice as great at the onset of microgravity than at the onset of 
the 1-G baseline, but converged toward that baseline within about 4.5 min.
CONCLUSIONS: Our subjects accepted a consistently poor level of sensorimotor 
performance throughout exposure to microgravity. To maintain that level, they 
increased the allocation of computational resources to the tasks at the onset of 
microgravity, but an increase was no longer necessary after 4.5 min of 
microgravity exposure. We take the initial increase as evidence of a brief phase 
of sensorimotor adaptation.

PMID: 14692468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Front Hum Neurosci. 2019 Jul 3;13:207. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2019.00207. 
eCollection 2019.

Explicit Control of Step Timing During Split-Belt Walking Reveals Interdependent 
Recalibration of Movements in Space and Time.

Gonzalez-Rubio M(1), Velasquez NF(1), Torres-Oviedo G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, 
United States.

Split-belt treadmills that move the legs at different speeds are thought to 
update internal representations of the environment, such that this novel 
condition generates a new locomotor pattern with distinct spatio-temporal 
features compared to those of regular walking. It is unclear the degree to which 
such recalibration of movements in the spatial and temporal domains is 
interdependent. In this study, we explicitly altered subjects' limb motion in 
either space or time during split-belt walking to determine its impact on the 
adaptation of the other domain. Interestingly, we observed that motor adaptation 
in the spatial domain was susceptible to altering the temporal domain, whereas 
motor adaptation in the temporal domain was resilient to modifying the spatial 
domain. This non-reciprocal relation suggests a hierarchical organization such 
that the control of timing in locomotion has an effect on the control of limb 
position. This is of translational interest because clinical populations often 
have a greater deficit in one domain compared to the other. Our results suggest 
that explicit changes to temporal deficits cannot occur without modifying the 
spatial control of the limb.

DOI: 10.3389/fnhum.2019.00207
PMCID: PMC6619396
PMID: 31333429


247. J Neurophysiol. 2011 Aug;106(2):667-79. doi: 10.1152/jn.00638.2010. Epub 2011 
May 11.

Integration of auditory and somatosensory error signals in the neural control of 
speech movements.

Feng Y(1), Gracco VL, Max L.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Speech Acoustics and Content Understanding, Institute of 
Acoustics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

We investigated auditory and somatosensory feedback contributions to the neural 
control of speech. In task I, sensorimotor adaptation was studied by perturbing 
one of these sensory modalities or both modalities simultaneously. The first 
formant (F1) frequency in the auditory feedback was shifted up by a real-time 
processor and/or the extent of jaw opening was increased or decreased with a 
force field applied by a robotic device. All eight subjects lowered F1 to 
compensate for the up-shifted F1 in the feedback signal regardless of whether or 
not the jaw was perturbed. Adaptive changes in subjects' acoustic output 
resulted from adjustments in articulatory movements of the jaw or tongue. 
Adaptation in jaw opening extent in response to the mechanical perturbation 
occurred only when no auditory feedback perturbation was applied or when the 
direction of adaptation to the force was compatible with the direction of 
adaptation to a simultaneous acoustic perturbation. In tasks II and III, 
subjects' auditory and somatosensory precision and accuracy were estimated. 
Correlation analyses showed that the relationships 1) between F1 adaptation 
extent and auditory acuity for F1 and 2) between jaw position adaptation extent 
and somatosensory acuity for jaw position were weak and statistically not 
significant. Taken together, the combined findings from this work suggest that, 
in speech production, sensorimotor adaptation updates the underlying control 
mechanisms in such a way that the planning of vowel-related articulatory 
movements takes into account a complex integration of error signals from 
previous trials but likely with a dominant role for the auditory modality.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00638.2010
PMCID: PMC3154803
PMID: 21562187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Nat Neurosci. 2005 Oct;8(10):1292-4. doi: 10.1038/nn1532. Epub 2005 Aug 28.

Spatial navigation impairment in mice lacking cerebellar LTD: a motor adaptation 
deficit?

Burguière E(1), Arleo A, Hojjati Mr, Elgersma Y, De Zeeuw CI, Berthoz A, 
Rondi-Reig L.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Physiologie de la Perception et de l'Action, UMR CNRS 7152, 11 
place Marcelin Berthelot, Collège de France, 75005 Paris, France.

L7-PKCI transgenic mice, which lack parallel fiber-Purkinje cell long-term 
depression (LTD), were tested with two different mazes to dissociate the 
relative importance of declarative and procedural components of spatial 
navigation. We show that L7-PKCI mice are deficient in acquisition of an adapted 
goal-oriented behavior, part of the procedural component of the task. This 
supports the hypothesis that cerebellar LTD may subserve a general sensorimotor 
adaptation process shared by motor and spatial learning functions.

DOI: 10.1038/nn1532
PMID: 16136042 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


249. J Physiol. 2018 May 15;596(10):1999-2016. doi: 10.1113/JP275881. Epub 2018 Apr 
17.

A single exercise bout and locomotor learning after stroke: physiological, 
behavioural, and computational outcomes.

Charalambous CC(1), Alcantara CC(1)(2), French MA(3), Li X(1)(3), Matt KS(4), 
Kim HE(5), Morton SM(1)(3), Reisman DS(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Therapy, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, USA.
(2)Department of Physical Therapy, Federal University of São Carlos, São Carlos, 
Brazil.
(3)Biomechanics and Movement Science Program, University of Delaware, Newark, 
DE, USA.
(4)College of Health Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, USA.
(5)Department of Psychology and Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University 
of California, Berkeley, CA, USA.

Comment in
    J Physiol. 2018 May 15;596(10):1785-1786.

KEY POINTS: Previous work demonstrated an effect of a single high-intensity 
exercise bout coupled with motor practice on the retention of a newly acquired 
skilled arm movement, in both neurologically intact and impaired adults. In the 
present study, using behavioural and computational analyses we demonstrated that 
a single exercise bout, regardless of its intensity and timing, did not increase 
the retention of a novel locomotor task after stroke. Considering both present 
and previous work, we postulate that the benefits of exercise effect may depend 
on the type of motor learning (e.g. skill learning, sensorimotor adaptation) 
and/or task (e.g. arm accuracy-tracking task, walking).
ABSTRACT: Acute high-intensity exercise coupled with motor practice improves the 
retention of motor learning in neurologically intact adults. However, whether 
exercise could improve the retention of locomotor learning after stroke is still 
unknown. Here, we investigated the effect of exercise intensity and timing on 
the retention of a novel locomotor learning task (i.e. split-belt treadmill 
walking) after stroke. Thirty-seven people post stroke participated in two 
sessions, 24 h apart, and were allocated to active control (CON), treadmill 
walking (TMW), or total body exercise on a cycle ergometer (TBE). In session 1, 
all groups exercised for a short bout (∼5 min) at low (CON) or high (TMW and 
TBE) intensity and before (CON and TMW) or after (TBE) the locomotor learning 
task. In both sessions, the locomotor learning task was to walk on a split-belt 
treadmill in a 2:1 speed ratio (100% and 50% fast-comfortable walking speed) for 
15 min. To test the effect of exercise on 24 h retention, we applied behavioural 
and computational analyses. Behavioural data showed that neither high-intensity 
group showed greater 24 h retention compared to CON, and computational data 
showed that 24 h retention was attributable to a slow learning process for 
sensorimotor adaptation. Our findings demonstrated that acute exercise coupled 
with a locomotor adaptation task, regardless of its intensity and timing, does 
not improve retention of the novel locomotor task after stroke. We postulate 
that exercise effects on motor learning may be context specific (e.g. type of 
motor learning and/or task) and interact with the presence of genetic variant 
(BDNF Val66Met).

© 2018 The Authors. The Journal of Physiology © 2018 The Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1113/JP275881
PMCID: PMC5978382
PMID: 29569729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Cereb Cortex. 2015 Jul;25(7):1867-77. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bht428. Epub 2014 Jan 
22.

Evidence for Cerebellar Contributions to Adaptive Plasticity in Speech 
Perception.

Guediche S(1), Holt LL(2), Laurent P(3), Lim SJ(4), Fiez JA(5).

Author information:
(1)Center for Neuroscience at the University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 
Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Current address: 
Department of Cognitive, Linguistic, and Psychological Sciences, Brown 
University, Providence, RI, USA.
(2)Center for Neuroscience at the University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 
Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Department of 
Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(3)Center for Neuroscience at the University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 
Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Current address: 
Brain Corporation, San Diego, CA, USA.
(4)Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Department of 
Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(5)Center for Neuroscience at the University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 
Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Department of 
Psychology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

Human speech perception rapidly adapts to maintain comprehension under adverse 
listening conditions. For example, with exposure listeners can adapt to heavily 
accented speech produced by a non-native speaker. Outside the domain of speech 
perception, adaptive changes in sensory and motor processing have been 
attributed to cerebellar functions. The present functional magnetic resonance 
imaging study investigates whether adaptation in speech perception also involves 
the cerebellum. Acoustic stimuli were distorted using a vocoding plus 
spectral-shift manipulation and presented in a word recognition task. Regions in 
the cerebellum that showed differences before versus after adaptation were 
identified, and the relationship between activity during adaptation and 
subsequent behavioral improvements was examined. These analyses implicated the 
right Crus I region of the cerebellum in adaptive changes in speech perception. 
A functional correlation analysis with the right Crus I as a seed region probed 
for cerebral cortical regions with covarying hemodynamic responses during the 
adaptation period. The results provided evidence of a functional network between 
the cerebellum and language-related regions in the temporal and parietal lobes 
of the cerebral cortex. Consistent with known cerebellar contributions to 
sensorimotor adaptation, cerebro-cerebellar interactions may support supervised 
learning mechanisms that rely on sensory prediction error signals in speech 
perception.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bht428
PMCID: PMC4481605
PMID: 24451660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Vestib Res. 2010;20(1):31-43. doi: 10.3233/VES-2010-0349.

Neurovestibular considerations for sub-orbital space flight: A framework for 
future investigation.

Karmali F(1), Shelhamer M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, Boston, 
MA, USA.

Commercial sub-orbital operators will soon offer the excitement of traveling to 
space to thousands of people. Based on previous experience in space flight and 
parabolic flight, sensorimotor disruptions in eye movements, postural stability, 
and motor coordination are likely in these travelers. Here we propose a 
framework for developing strategies to overcome these sensorimotor disruptions. 
We delineate how approaches should differ from those applied to orbital flight 
and between sub-orbital passengers and pilots based on differing frequency of 
flights and mission objectives. Sensorimotor adaptation is one strategy for 
overcoming disruptions; an important question is whether it occurs quickly 
enough to be of use during periods of reduced and enhanced gravity lasting less 
than five minutes. Data are presented showing that sensorimotor adaptation of 
the pitch vestibulo-ocular reflex during parabolic flight takes a few 
consecutive days of flying to overcome an initial disruption. We conclude with 
recommendations for operators and researchers to improve safety and comfort 
during sub-orbital operations. We recommend using parabolic flight as a tool for 
pre-adapting sub-orbital passengers, along with further research into the 
required quantity and timing of these pre-adaptation flights and the tasks 
conducted during these flights. Likewise, for sub-orbital pilots, we recommend 
emphasizing recency of experience.

DOI: 10.3233/VES-2010-0349
PMCID: PMC3634569
PMID: 20555165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


252. eNeuro. 2020 Feb 24;7(1):ENEURO.0493-19.2020. doi: 10.1523/ENEURO.0493-19.2020. 
Print 2020 Jan/Feb.

Cerebral Contribution to the Execution, But Not Recalibration, of Motor Commands 
in a Novel Walking Environment.

de Kam D(1)(2), Iturralde PA(1)(3), Torres-Oviedo G(4).

Author information:
(1)Swanson School of Engineering, Department of Bioengineering, University of 
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213.
(2)Department of Rehabilitation, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, HB 6500, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Depto. de Ingeniería, Facultad de Ingeniería y Tecnologías, Universidad 
Católica del Uruguay, CP 11600, Montevideo, Uruguay.
(4)Swanson School of Engineering, Department of Bioengineering, University of 
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213 gelsyto@pitt.edu.

Human movements are flexible as they continuously adapt to changes in the 
environment. The recalibration of corrective responses to sustained 
perturbations (e.g., constant force) altering one's movement contributes to this 
flexibility. We asked whether the recalibration of corrective actions involve 
cerebral structures using stroke as a disease model. We characterized changes in 
muscle activity in stroke survivors and control subjects before, during, and 
after walking on a split-belt treadmill moving the legs at different speeds. The 
recalibration of corrective muscle activity was comparable between stroke 
survivors and control subjects, which was unexpected given the known deficits in 
feedback responses poststroke. Also, the intact recalibration in stroke 
survivors contrasted their limited ability to adjust their muscle activity 
during steady-state split-belt walking. Our results suggest that the 
recalibration and execution of motor commands are partially dissociable: 
cerebral lesions interfere with the execution, but not the recalibration, of 
motor commands on novel movement demands.

Copyright © 2020 de Kam et al.

DOI: 10.1523/ENEURO.0493-19.2020
PMCID: PMC7053171
PMID: 32001549


253. Neuron. 2006 Feb 16;49(4):577-88. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2006.01.027.

A "sample-and-hold" pulse-counting integrator as a mechanism for graded memory 
underlying sensorimotor adaptation.

Oestreich J(1), Dembrow NC, George AA, Zakon HH.

Author information:
(1)Section of Neurobiology, The University of Texas at Austin, 1 University 
Station C0920, Austin, Texas 78712, USA.

The mechanisms behind the induction of cellular correlates of memory by sensory 
input and their contribution to meaningful behavioral changes are largely 
unknown. We previously reported a graded memory in the form of sensorimotor 
adaptation in the electromotor output of electric fish. Here we show that the 
mechanism for this adaptation is a synaptically induced long-lasting shift in 
intrinsic neuronal excitability. This mechanism rapidly integrates hundreds of 
spikes in a second, or gradually integrates the same number of spikes delivered 
over tens of minutes. Thus, this mechanism appears immune to frequency-dependent 
fluctuations in input and operates as a simple pulse counter over a wide range 
of time scales, enabling it to transduce graded sensory information into a 
graded memory and a corresponding change in the behavioral output. This 
adaptation is based on an NMDA receptor-mediated change in intrinsic 
excitability of the postsynaptic neurons involving the Ca2+-dependent activation 
of TRP channels.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2006.01.027
PMID: 16476666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Neurosci Lett. 2006 Nov 20;408(3):173-7. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2006.07.072. Epub 
2006 Oct 9.

Sensorimotor adaptation to inertial forces in a multi-force environment does not 
depend on the number of targets: indirect validation of the 
altered-proprioception hypothesis.

Bourdin C(1), Bock O.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire Mouvement et Perception CNRS UMR 6152, Université de la 
Méditerranée, Faculté des Sciences du Sport, 163 avenue de Luminy-CP 910, 13288 
Marseille Cedex 9, France. christophe.bourdin@univmed.fr

The ability of our sensorimotor system to adapt to changing and complex 
environmental demands has been under experimental scrutiny for more than a 
century. Previous works have shown that aimed arm movements adapt quickly and 
completely to Coriolis force, but incompletely to the combination of Coriolis 
and centrifugal forces without visual cues. Two hypotheses may be advanced to 
explain this discrepancy: the workspace-exploration hypothesis, and the 
degraded-proprioception hypothesis. The aim of this study was to distinguish 
between the above two alternatives by comparing adaptive improvement during 
off-axis rotation in subjects pointing at one, three or seven different targets 
in complete darkness. Two main results emerge: (a) off-axis rotation led 
initially to errors in the direction of Coriolis force and in the opposite 
direction of the centrifugal force; (b) the size of the visited workspace has no 
effect on the way the subjects adapt to a multi-force environment. The lack of a 
target-number effect and the persistence of lateral errors in the pointing 
movements performed during rotation of the platform, support the 
degraded-proprioception rather than the workspace-exploration hypothesis of 
adaptation to a multi-force environment.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2006.07.072
PMID: 17030093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Neurophysiol. 2015 Nov;114(5):2764-74. doi: 10.1152/jn.00749.2015. Epub 2015 
Sep 2.

To transfer or not to transfer? Kinematics and laterality quotient predict 
interlimb transfer of motor learning.

Lefumat HZ(1), Vercher JL(1), Miall RC(2), Cole J(3), Buloup F(1), Bringoux 
L(1), Bourdin C(1), Sarlegna FR(4).

Author information:
(1)Aix-Marseille University, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, ISM 
UMR 7287, Marseille, France;
(2)School of Psychology, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom; 
and.
(3)Clinical Neurophysiology, Poole Hospital, and School of Psychology, 
Bournemouth University, Poole, United Kingdom.
(4)Aix-Marseille University, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, ISM 
UMR 7287, Marseille, France; fabrice.sarlegna@univ-amu.fr.

Humans can remarkably adapt their motor behavior to novel environmental 
conditions, yet it remains unclear which factors enable us to transfer what we 
have learned with one limb to the other. Here we tested the hypothesis that 
interlimb transfer of sensorimotor adaptation is determined by environmental 
conditions but also by individual characteristics. We specifically examined the 
adaptation of unconstrained reaching movements to a novel Coriolis, 
velocity-dependent force field. Right-handed subjects sat at the center of a 
rotating platform and performed forward reaching movements with the upper limb 
toward flashed visual targets in prerotation, per-rotation (i.e., adaptation), 
and postrotation tests. Here only the dominant arm was used during adaptation 
and interlimb transfer was assessed by comparing performance of the nondominant 
arm before and after dominant-arm adaptation. Vision and no-vision conditions 
did not significantly influence interlimb transfer of trajectory adaptation, 
which on average was significant but limited. We uncovered a substantial 
heterogeneity of interlimb transfer across subjects and found that interlimb 
transfer can be qualitatively and quantitatively predicted for each healthy 
young individual. A classifier showed that in our study, interlimb transfer 
could be predicted based on the subject's task performance, most notably motor 
variability during learning, and his or her laterality quotient. Positive 
correlations suggested that variability of motor performance and lateralization 
of arm movement control facilitate interlimb transfer. We further show that 
these individual characteristics can predict the presence and the magnitude of 
interlimb transfer of left-handers. Overall, this study suggests that individual 
characteristics shape the way the nervous system can generalize motor learning.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00749.2015
PMCID: PMC4644229
PMID: 26334018 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Neurophysiol. 2018 Oct 1;120(4):1923-1931. doi: 10.1152/jn.00252.2018. Epub 
2018 Aug 8.

A locomotor learning paradigm using distorted visual feedback elicits strategic 
learning.

French MA(1)(2), Morton SM(1)(2), Charalambous CC(1)(3), Reisman DS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Therapy, University of Delaware , Newark, Delaware.
(2)Biomechanics and Movement Science Program, University of Delaware , Newark, 
Delaware.
(3)Department of Neurology, New York University Langone Health , New York, New 
York.

Distorted visual feedback (DVF) during locomotion has been suggested to result 
in the development of a new walking pattern in healthy individuals through 
implicit learning processes. Recent work in upper extremity visuomotor rotation 
paradigms suggest that these paradigms involve implicit and explicit learning. 
Additionally, in upper extremity visuomotor paradigms, the verbal cues provided 
appear to impact how a behavior is learned and when this learned behavior is 
used. Here, in two experiments in neurologically intact individuals, we tested 
how verbal instruction impacts learning a new locomotor pattern on a treadmill 
through DVF, the transfer of that pattern to overground walking, and what types 
of learning occur (i.e., implicit vs. explicit learning). In experiment 1, we 
found that the instructions provided impacted the amount learned through DVF, 
but not the size of the aftereffects or the amount of the pattern transferred to 
overground walking. Additionally, the aftereffects observed were significantly 
different from the baseline walking pattern, but smaller than the behavior 
changes observed during learning, which is uncharacteristic of implicit 
sensorimotor adaptation. Thus, experiment 2 aimed to determine the cause of 
these discrepancies. In this experiment, when VF was not provided, individuals 
continued using the learned walking pattern when instructed to do so and 
returned toward their baseline pattern when instructed to do so. Based on these 
results, we conclude that DVF during locomotion results in a large portion of 
explicit learning and a small portion of implicit learning. NEW & NOTEWORTHY The 
results of this study suggest that distorted visual feedback during locomotor 
learning involves the development of an explicit strategy with only a small 
component of implicit learning. This is important because previous studies using 
distorted visual feedback have suggested that locomotor learning relies 
primarily on implicit learning. This paradigm, therefore, provides a new way to 
examine a different form of learning in locomotion.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00252.2018
PMCID: PMC6230784
PMID: 30089023 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Neurophysiol. 2017 Apr 1;117(4):1423-1425. doi: 10.1152/jn.00274.2016. Epub 
2016 Aug 3.

Motor outcomes of feedback delays and implicit/explicit strategy use: 
experimental considerations and clinical implications.

Oswald K(1), Campbell R(2), Wright M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Eastern Michigan University, Ypsilanti, Michigan 
koswald1@emich.edu.
(2)Department of Psychology, Eastern Michigan University, Ypsilanti, Michigan.

Sensorimotor adaptation requires integration of internal models of motor control 
with feedback from the external environment. As highlighted by Brudner, Kethidi, 
Graeupner, Ivry, and Taylor (J Neurophysiol 115: 1499-1511, 2016), feedback 
characteristics, error or outcome based, as well as temporal constraints can 
impact motor learning and adaptation strategies. These findings provide novel 
insight into the underlying components of motor control, which can be applied to 
future clinical and experimental research on motor processes.

Copyright © 2017 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00274.2016
PMCID: PMC5376614
PMID: 27489365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Aviat Space Environ Med. 1987 Sep;58(9 Pt 2):A148-52.

The nature of sensorimotor adaptation to altered G-levels: evidence from mass 
discrimination.

Ross HE(1), Schwartz E, Emmerson P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Stirling, Scotland, United Kingdom.

Mass discrimination is impaired under zero G compared to 1 G. This is partly due 
to loss of weight information (a reduction in z-axis pressure stimulation), and 
probably also to incomplete adaptation to the reduced G-level. Maladaptation to 
an increased G-level postflight causes objects to feel too heavy and weight 
discrimination to be impaired. Video tapes of hand movements while shaking test 
objects were made before, during, and after the D-1 Spacelab mission. Movements 
were faster inflight than preflight, slowed down postflight and returned to 
baseline by about the third day. Corresponding changes in movement amplitude 
also occurred. Errors of weight or mass perception during the maladaptation 
phase may be due to both inadequate monitoring of command signals and to 
inappropriate scaling of afferent signals. High-acceleration shaking was found 
to improve mass discrimination but impair weight discrimination.

PMID: 3675482 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Front Integr Neurosci. 2017 Dec 15;11:35. doi: 10.3389/fnint.2017.00035. 
eCollection 2017.

Modulation of Speech Motor Learning with Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation 
of the Inferior Parietal Lobe.

Deroche MLD(1), Nguyen DL(1), Gracco VL(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Research on Brain, Language and Music, McGill University, 
Montreal, QC, Canada.
(2)Haskins Laboratories, New Haven, CT, United States.

The inferior parietal lobe (IPL) is a region of the cortex believed to 
participate in speech motor learning. In this study, we investigated whether 
transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) of the IPL could influence the 
extent to which healthy adults (1) adapted to a sensory alteration of their own 
auditory feedback, and (2) changed their perceptual representation. Seventy 
subjects completed three tasks: a baseline perceptual task that located the 
phonetic boundary between the vowels /e/ and /a/; a sensorimotor adaptation task 
in which subjects produced the word "head" under conditions of altered or 
unaltered feedback; and a post-adaptation perceptual task identical to the 
first. Subjects were allocated to four groups which differed in current polarity 
and feedback manipulation. Subjects who received anodal tDCS to their IPL (i.e., 
presumably increasing cortical excitability) lowered their first formant 
frequency (F1) by 10% in opposition to the upward shift in F1 in their auditory 
feedback. Subjects who received the same stimulation with unaltered feedback did 
not change their production. Subjects who received cathodal tDCS to their IPL 
(i.e., presumably decreasing cortical excitability) showed a 5% adaptation to 
the F1 alteration similar to subjects who received sham tDCS. A subset of 
subjects returned a few days later to reiterate the same protocol but without 
tDCS, enabling assessment of any facilitatory effects of the previous tDCS. All 
subjects exhibited a 5% adaptation effect. In addition, across all subjects and 
for the two recording sessions, the phonetic boundary was shifted toward the 
vowel /e/ being repeated, consistently with the selective adaptation effect, but 
a correlation between perception and production suggested that anodal tDCS had 
enhanced this perceptual shift. In conclusion, we successfully demonstrated that 
anodal tDCS could (1) enhance the motor adaptation to a sensory alteration, and 
(2) potentially affect the perceptual representation of those sounds, but we 
failed to demonstrate the reverse effect with the cathodal configuration. 
Overall, tDCS of the left IPL can be used to enhance speech performance but only 
under conditions in which new or adaptive learning is required.

DOI: 10.3389/fnint.2017.00035
PMCID: PMC5737029
PMID: 29326563


260. J Neurophysiol. 2016 Mar;115(3):1122-31. doi: 10.1152/jn.00639.2015. Epub 2015 
Dec 9.

Effect of blocking tactile information from the fingertips on adaptation and 
execution of grip forces to friction at the grasping surface.

Bilaloglu S(1), Lu Y(2), Geller D(1), Rizzo JR(1), Aluru V(1), Gardner EP(3), 
Raghavan P(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, New York University School of 
Medicine, New York, New York;
(2)Center for the Promotion of Research Involving Innovative Statistical 
Methodology, Steinhardt School of Culture, Education and Human Development, New 
York University, New York, New York;
(3)Department of Neuroscience and Physiology, New York University School of 
Medicine, New York, New York; and.
(4)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, New York University School of 
Medicine, New York, New York; Department of Physical Therapy, Steinhardt School 
of Culture, Education and Human Development, New York University, New York, New 
York preeti.raghavan@nyumc.org.

Adaptation of fingertip forces to friction at the grasping surface is necessary 
to prevent use of inadequate or excessive grip forces. In the current study we 
investigated the effect of blocking tactile information from the fingertips 
noninvasively on the adaptation and efficiency of grip forces to surface 
friction during precision grasp. Ten neurologically intact subjects grasped and 
lifted an instrumented grip device with 18 different frictional surfaces under 
three conditions: with bare hands or with a thin layer of plastic (Tegaderm) or 
an additional layer of foam affixed to the fingertips. The coefficient of 
friction at the finger-object interface of each surface was obtained for each 
subject with bare hands and Tegaderm by measuring the slip ratio (grip 
force/load force) at the moment of slip. We found that the foam layer reduced 
sensibility for two-point discrimination and pressure sensitivity at the 
fingertips, but Tegaderm did not. However, Tegaderm reduced static, but not 
dynamic, tactile discrimination. Adaptation of fingertip grip forces to surface 
friction measured by the rate of change of peak grip force, and grip force 
efficiency measured by the grip-load force ratio at lift, showed a proportional 
relationship with bare hands but were impaired with Tegaderm and foam. 
Activation of muscles engaged in precision grip also varied with the frictional 
surface with bare hands but not with Tegaderm and foam. The results suggest that 
sensitivity for static tactile discrimination is necessary for feedforward and 
feedback control of grip forces and for adaptive modulation of muscle activity 
during precision grasp.

Copyright © 2016 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00639.2015
PMCID: PMC4808115
PMID: 26655820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Front Neurol. 2018 Mar 14;9:151. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2018.00151. eCollection 
2018.

Spontaneous Nystagmus in the Dark in an Infantile Nystagmus Patient May 
Represent Negative Optokinetic Afternystagmus.

Lin TF(1)(2), Gerth-Kahlert C(3), Hanson JVM(3)(4), Straumann D(1)(2), Huang 
MY(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Zurich, University of Zurich, 
Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Neuroscience Center Zurich (ZNZ), University of Zurich and ETH Zurich, 
Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(4)Neuroimmunology and Multiple Sclerosis Research, Clinic for Neurology, 
University Hospital Zurich, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Abnormal projection of the optic nerves to the wrong cerebral hemisphere 
transforms the optokinetic system from its usual negative feedback loop to a 
positive feedback loop with characteristic ocular motor instabilities including 
directional reversal of the optokinetic nystagmus (OKN) and spontaneous 
nystagmus, which are common features of infantile nystagmus syndrome (INS). 
Visual input plays a critical role in INS linked to an underlying optic nerve 
misprojection such as that often seen in albinism. However, spontaneous 
nystagmus often continues in darkness, making the visual, sensory-driven 
etiology questionable. We propose that sensorimotor adaptation during the 
constant nystagmus of patients in the light could account for continuing 
nystagmus in the dark. The OKN is a stereotyped reflexive eye movement in 
response to motion in the surround and serves to stabilize the visual image on 
the retina, allowing high resolution vision. Robust negative optokinetic 
afternystagmus (negative OKAN), referring to the continuous nystagmus in the 
dark with opposite beating direction of the preceding OKN, has been identified 
in various non-foveated animals. In humans, a robust afternystagmus in the same 
direction as previous smooth-pursuit movements (the eye's continuous tracking 
and foveation of a moving target) induced by visual stimuli has been known to 
commonly mask negative OKAN. Some INS patients are often associated with ocular 
hypopigmentation, foveal hypoplasia, and compromised smooth pursuit. We 
identified an INS case with negative OKAN in the dark, in contrast to the 
positive afternystagmus in healthy subjects. We hypothesize that spontaneous 
nystagmus in the dark in INS patients may be attributable to sensory adaptation 
in the optokinetic system after a sustained period of spontaneous nystagmus with 
directional visual input in light.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2018.00151
PMCID: PMC5861190
PMID: 29593643


262. J Mot Behav. 2008 Sep;40(5):368-79. doi: 10.3200/JMBR.40.5.368-379.

Adaptation to a nonlinear visuomotor amplitude transformation with continuous 
and terminal visual feedback.

Heuer H(1), Hegele M.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Arbeitsphysiologie, der Universität Dortmund, Dortmund, Germany. 
heuer@ifado.de

The control of a cursor on a computer monitor offers a simple means of exploring 
the limits of the plasticity of human visuomotor coordination. The authors 
explored the boundary conditions for adaptation to nonlinear visuomotor 
amplitude transformations. The authors hypothesized that only with terminal 
visual feedback during practice, but not with continuous visual feedback, humans 
might develop an internal model of the nonlinear visuomotor amplitude 
transformation. Thus, 2 groups were engaged in a sensorimotor adaptation task 
receiving either continuous or terminal visual feedback during the practice 
phase. In contrast to expectations, adaptive shifts and aftereffects observed in 
visual open-loop tests were linearly related to target amplitudes for both 
groups. Although the 2 feedback groups did not differ with respect to adaptive 
shifts and aftereffects, terminal visual feedback resulted in stable visual 
open-loop performance for an extended period, whereas movement errors increased 
after continuous visual feedback during practice. The benefit of continuous 
visual feedback, on the other hand, was faster closed-loop performance, 
indicating an optimization of visual closed-loop control.

DOI: 10.3200/JMBR.40.5.368-379
PMID: 18782712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Front Syst Neurosci. 2015 Apr 10;9:55. doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2015.00055. 
eCollection 2015.

The Variable Vector Countermeasure Suit (V2Suit) for space habitation and 
exploration.

Duda KR(1), Vasquez RA(1), Middleton AJ(1), Hansberry ML(1), Newman DJ(2), 
Jacobs SE(3), West JJ(1).

Author information:
(1)The Charles Stark Draper Laboratory, Inc. Cambridge, MA, USA.
(2)Massachusetts Institute of Technology Cambridge, MA, USA.
(3)David Clark Company, Inc. Worcester, MA, USA.

The "Variable Vector Countermeasure Suit (V2Suit) for Space Habitation and 
Exploration" is a novel system concept that provides a platform for integrating 
sensors and actuators with daily astronaut intravehicular activities to improve 
health and performance, while reducing the mass and volume of the physiologic 
adaptation countermeasure systems, as well as the required exercise time during 
long-duration space exploration missions. The V2Suit system leverages wearable 
kinematic monitoring technology and uses inertial measurement units (IMUs) and 
control moment gyroscopes (CMGs) within miniaturized modules placed on body 
segments to provide a "viscous resistance" during movements against a specified 
direction of "down"-initially as a countermeasure to the sensorimotor adaptation 
performance decrements that manifest themselves while living and working in 
microgravity and during gravitational transitions during long-duration 
spaceflight, including post-flight recovery and rehabilitation. Several aspects 
of the V2Suit system concept were explored and simulated prior to developing a 
brassboard prototype for technology demonstration. This included a system 
architecture for identifying the key components and their interconnects, initial 
identification of key human-system integration challenges, development of a 
simulation architecture for CMG selection and parameter sizing, and the detailed 
mechanical design and fabrication of a module. The brassboard prototype 
demonstrates closed-loop control from "down" initialization through CMG 
actuation, and provides a research platform for human performance evaluations to 
mitigate sensorimotor adaptation, as well as a tool for determining the 
performance requirements when used as a musculoskeletal deconditioning 
countermeasure. This type of countermeasure system also has Earth benefits, 
particularly in gait or movement stabilization and rehabilitation.

DOI: 10.3389/fnsys.2015.00055
PMCID: PMC4392692
PMID: 25914631


264. J Mot Behav. 2014;46(6):389-96. doi: 10.1080/00222895.2014.920290. Epub 2014 Sep 
10.

The functional role of cognitive frameworks on visuomotor adaptation 
performance.

Lex H(1), Weigelt M, Knoblauch A, Schack T.

Author information:
(1)a Neurocognition and Action - Research Group , Bielefeld University , 
Germany.

The authors investigated the effects of cognitive representations of movement 
directions on sensorimotor adaptation performance. Adaptation performance was 
measured via a pointing experiment in which participants were provided with 
visual feedback that was distorted along the midsagittal plane (i.e., left-right 
reversal). Performance was analyzed relative to participants' individual 
adaptation gains and 3 groups were subsequently defined (i.e., skilled, average, 
and poor adapters). The group separation was kept for the Cognitive Measurement 
of Represented Directions, which was used to analyze participants' cognitive 
representation of movement directions. The results showed that skilled adapters, 
in contrast to poor adapters, possess a global representation of movement 
directions aligned to the cardinal axes. The cognitive representation structure 
hence supports the sensorimotor adaptation performance.

DOI: 10.1080/00222895.2014.920290
PMID: 25205332 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Am J Ment Defic. 1977 Nov;82(3):292-8.

Electroencephalographic correlates of prism adaptation in mentally retarded 
individuals.

Scheel V, Galbraith GC.

Sensorimotor adaptation was studied in 23 institutionalized, mentally retarded 
individuals. This was achieved by recording the pattern of off-target pointing 
errors resulting from viewing through a 20-diopter prism. The results showed a 
wide range of individual differences in prism adaptation. The 
electroencephalogram (EEG) was also recorded from four scalp locations and 
analyzed by computer to determine EEG intensity, coherence, and phase angle. 
Correlations between EEG and behavioral scores of prism adaptation revealed a 
number of significant relationships, especially negative correlations between 
alpha intensity and prismatic adaptation. These results indicate that patterns 
of central nervous system activity are meaningful related to sensorimotor 
capabilities in retarded individuals.

PMID: 930967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


266. J Speech Lang Hear Res. 2011 Aug;54(4):1051-9. doi: 
10.1044/1092-4388(2010/10-0162). Epub 2010 Dec 20.

Prosodic adaptations to pitch perturbation in running speech.

Patel R(1), Niziolek C, Reilly K, Guenther FH.

Author information:
(1)Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA. r.patel@neu.edu

PURPOSE: A feedback perturbation paradigm was used to investigate whether 
prosodic cues are controlled independently or in an integrated fashion during 
sentence production.
METHOD: Twenty-one healthy speakers of American English were asked to produce 
sentences with emphatic stress while receiving real-time auditory feedback of 
their productions. The fundamental frequency (F0) of the stressed word in each 
4-word sentence was selectively shifted in a sensorimotor adaptation protocol. 
Speakers experienced either an upward or a downward shift of the stressed word, 
which gradually altered the perceived stress of the sentence.
RESULTS: Participants in the Up and Down groups adapted to F0 shifts by altering 
the contrast between stressed and unstressed words differentially, such that the 
two groups deviated from each other in the perturbation phase. Furthermore, 
selective F0 perturbation in sentences with emphatic stress resulted in 
compensatory changes in both F0 and intensity.
CONCLUSIONS: Present findings suggest that F0 and intensity are controlled in an 
integrated fashion to maintain the contrast between stressed and unstressed 
words. When a cue is impaired through perturbation, speakers not only oppose the 
perturbation but enhance other prosodic cues to achieve emphatic stress.

DOI: 10.1044/1092-4388(2010/10-0162)
PMCID: PMC3352853
PMID: 21173388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Front Hum Neurosci. 2017 Apr 7;11:161. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2017.00161. 
eCollection 2017.

Mapping the Speech Code: Cortical Responses Linking the Perception and 
Production of Vowels.

Schuerman WL(1), Meyer AS(1)(2), McQueen JM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Psychology of Language, Max Planck Institute for PsycholinguisticsNijmegen, 
Netherlands.
(2)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud 
UniversityNijmegen, Netherlands.

The acoustic realization of speech is constrained by the physical mechanisms by 
which it is produced. Yet for speech perception, the degree to which listeners 
utilize experience derived from speech production has long been debated. In the 
present study, we examined how sensorimotor adaptation during production may 
affect perception, and how this relationship may be reflected in early vs. late 
electrophysiological responses. Participants first performed a baseline speech 
production task, followed by a vowel categorization task during which EEG 
responses were recorded. In a subsequent speech production task, half the 
participants received shifted auditory feedback, leading most to alter their 
articulations. This was followed by a second, post-training vowel categorization 
task. We compared changes in vowel production to both behavioral and 
electrophysiological changes in vowel perception. No differences in phonetic 
categorization were observed between groups receiving altered or unaltered 
feedback. However, exploratory analyses revealed correlations between vocal 
motor behavior and phonetic categorization. EEG analyses revealed correlations 
between vocal motor behavior and cortical responses in both early and late time 
windows. These results suggest that participants' recent production behavior 
influenced subsequent vowel perception. We suggest that the change in perception 
can be best characterized as a mapping of acoustics onto articulation.

DOI: 10.3389/fnhum.2017.00161
PMCID: PMC5383703
PMID: 28439232


268. Vision Res. 2008 Jan;48(2):149-66. doi: 10.1016/j.visres.2007.10.029. Epub 2007 
Dec 21.

Amplitude changes in response to target displacements during human eye-head 
movements.

Cecala AL(1), Freedman EG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, School of Medicine and Dentistry, 
University of Rochester Medical Center, 601 Elmwood Avenue, Box 603, Rochester, 
NY 14642, USA. aaron_cecala@urmc.rochester.edu

Sensorimotor adaptation, the ability to adjust motor output in response to 
persistent changes in sensory input, is a key function of the central nervous 
system. Although a great deal is known about vestibulo-ocular reflex and 
saccadic adaptation, relatively little is known about the behavior and neural 
mechanisms underlying gaze adaptation when the head is free to move. In an 
attempt to understand the mechanisms of gaze adaptation, and constrain 
hypotheses concerning the locus at which changes in gaze control may be 
implemented, we altered the size of large, head-unrestrained gaze shifts made to 
visual targets by surrepetitiously moving the visual target forward (30 degrees 
-->60 degrees ) or backwards (60 degrees -->30 degrees ) during gaze shifts. In 
our 10 human subjects, after a few hundred back-step trials, gaze amplitudes 
were reduced by between 6 degrees and 27 degrees. Similarly, after a few hundred 
forward adaptation trials, our subjects increased gaze amplitude by between 0 
degrees and 26 degrees. Changes in the amplitude of primary gaze shifts occurred 
regardless of the particular combinations of eye and head movements that made up 
the amplitude-altered gaze shifts. When gaze shifts were initiated with the eyes 
in systematically different positions relative to the head, the resulting 
changes in gaze, eye and head movement amplitudes were consistent with the 
hypothesis that gaze adaptation occurs at the level of a gaze shift command and 
not by altering separately the signals that produce eye and head movements.

DOI: 10.1016/j.visres.2007.10.029
PMCID: PMC2276249
PMID: 18155265 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Cerebellum. 2014 Dec;13(6):760-6. doi: 10.1007/s12311-014-0594-z.

A gait paradigm reveals different patterns of abnormal cerebellar motor learning 
in primary focal dystonias.

Hoffland BS(1), Veugen LC, Janssen MM, Pasman JW, Weerdesteyn V, van de 
Warrenburg BP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Accumulating evidence points to a role of the cerebellum in the pathophysiology 
of primary dystonia. The aim of this study was to investigate whether the 
abnormalities of cerebellar motor learning in primary dystonia are solely 
detectable in more pure forms of cerebellum-dependent associative motor learning 
paradigms, or whether these are also present in other motor learning paradigms 
that rely heavily on the cerebellum but in addition require a more widespread 
sensorimotor network. Twenty-six patients with various forms of focal dystonia 
and 10 age-matched healthy controls participated in a motor learning paradigm on 
a split-belt treadmill. By using reflective markers, three-dimensional 
kinematics were recorded using a 6-camera motion analysis system. Adaptation 
walking parameters were analyzed offline, comparing the different dystonia 
groups and healthy controls. Patients with blepharospasm and writer's cramp were 
significantly impaired on various adaptation walking parameters. Whereas results 
of cervical dystonia patients did not differ from healthy controls in terms of 
adaptation walking parameters, differences in parameters of normal gait were 
found. We have here demonstrated abnormal sensorimotor adaptation with the 
split-belt paradigm in patients with blepharospasm and writer's cramp. This 
reinforces the current concept of cerebellar dysfunction in primary dystonia, 
and that this extends beyond more pure forms of cerebellum-dependent associative 
motor learning paradigms. However, the finding of normal adaptation in cervical 
dystonia patients indicates that the pattern of cerebellar dysfunction may be 
slightly different for the various forms of primary focal dystonia, suggesting 
that actual cerebellar pathology may not be a primary driving force in dystonia.

DOI: 10.1007/s12311-014-0594-z
PMID: 25182695 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Neuropsychologia. 2007 Mar 14;45(5):1091-100. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2006.09.014. Epub 2006 Oct 30.

The evolutionary neuroscience of tool making.

Stout D(1), Chaminade T.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Archaeology, University College London, 31-34 Gordon Square, 
London WC1H 0PY, UK. dietrich.stout@ucl.ac.uk

The appearance of the first intentionally modified stone tools over 2.5 million 
years ago marked a watershed in human evolutionary history, expanding the human 
adaptive niche and initiating a trend of technological elaboration that 
continues to the present day. However, the cognitive foundations of this 
behavioral revolution remain controversial, as do its implications for the 
nature and evolution of modern human technological abilities. Here we shed new 
light on the neural and evolutionary foundations of human tool making skill by 
presenting functional brain imaging data from six inexperienced subjects 
learning to make stone tools of the kind found in the earliest archaeological 
record. Functional imaging of this complex, naturalistic task was accomplished 
through positron emission tomography with the slowly decaying radiological 
tracer (18)flouro-2-deoxyglucose. Results show that simple stone tool making is 
supported by a mosaic of primitive and derived parietofrontal perceptual-motor 
systems, including recently identified human specializations for representation 
of the central visual field and perception of three-dimensional form from 
motion. In the naïve tool makers reported here, no activation was observed in 
prefrontal executive cortices associated with strategic action planning or in 
inferior parietal cortex thought to play a role in the representation of 
everyday tool use skills. We conclude that uniquely human capacities for 
sensorimotor adaptation and affordance perception, rather than abstract 
conceptualization and planning, were central factors in the initial stages of 
human technological evolution.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2006.09.014
PMID: 17070875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


271. J Neurophysiol. 2010 Oct;104(4):2008-19. doi: 10.1152/jn.00433.2009. Epub 2010 
Jul 21.

Manual skill generalization enhanced by negative viscosity.

Huang FC(1), Patton JL, Mussa-Ivaldi FA.

Author information:
(1)Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago, Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 
Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA. f-huang@northwestern.edu

Recent human-machine interaction studies have suggested that movement augmented 
with negative viscosity can enhance performance and can even promote better 
motor learning. To test this, we investigated how negative viscosity influences 
motor adaptation to an environment where forces acted only in one axis of 
motion. Using a force-feedback device, subjects performed free exploratory 
movements with a purely inertia generating forces proportional to hand 
acceleration, negative viscosity generating destabilizing forces proportional to 
hand velocity, or a combination of the acceleration and velocity fields. After 
training, we evaluated each subject's ability to perform circular movements in 
only the inertial field. Combined training resulted in lowest error and revealed 
similar responses as inertia training in catch trials. These findings are 
remarkable because negative viscosity, available only during training, evidently 
enhanced learning when combined with inertia. This success in generalization is 
consistent with the ability of the nervous system to decompose the perturbing 
forces into velocity and acceleration dependent components. Compared with 
inertia, the combined group exhibited a broader range of speeds along the 
direction of maximal perturbing force. Broader exploration was also correlated 
with better performance in subsequent evaluation trials; this suggests that 
negative viscosity improved performance by enhancing identification of each 
force field. These findings shed light on a new way to enhance sensorimotor 
adaptation through robot-applied augmentation of mechanics.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00433.2009
PMCID: PMC2957452
PMID: 20660429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


272. J Neurosci. 2011 Mar 23;31(12):4607-12. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6079-10.2011.

Recalibration of auditory space following milliseconds of cross-modal 
discrepancy.

Wozny DR(1), Shams L.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany 
04103.

Basic features of objects and events in the environment such as timing and 
spatial location are encoded by multiple sensory modalities. This redundancy in 
sensory coding allows recalibration of one sense by other senses if there is a 
conflict between the sensory maps (Radeau and Bertelson, 1974; Zwiers et al., 
2003; Navarra et al., 2009). In contrast to motor or sensorimotor adaptation, 
which can be relatively rapid, cross-sensory recalibration (the change in an 
isolated sensory representation after exposure to conflicting cross-modal 
information) has been reported only as a result of an extensive amount of 
exposure to sensory discrepancy (e.g., hundreds or thousands of trials, or 
prolonged durations). Therefore, sensory recalibration has traditionally been 
associated with compensation for permanent changes that would occur during 
development or after traumatic injuries or stroke. Nonetheless, the dynamics of 
sensory recalibration is unknown, and it is unclear whether prolonged 
inconsistency is required to trigger recalibration or whether such mechanisms 
are continuously engaged in self-maintenance. We show that in humans 
recalibration of perceived auditory space by vision can occur after a single 
exposure to discrepant auditory-visual stimuli lasting only a few milliseconds. 
These findings suggest an impressive degree of plasticity in a basic perceptual 
map induced by a cross-modal error signal. Therefore, it appears that 
modification of sensory maps does not necessarily require accumulation of a 
substantial amount of evidence of error to be triggered, and is continuously 
operational. This scheme of sensory recalibration has many advantages. It only 
requires a small working memory capacity, and allows rapid adaptation to 
transient changes in the environment as well as the body.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6079-10.2011
PMCID: PMC3071751
PMID: 21430160 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Neuroscience. 2016 Sep 7;331:91-8. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2016.06.011. Epub 
2016 Jun 11.

The combined effects of action observation and passive proprioceptive training 
on adaptive motor learning.

Lei Y(1), Bao S(2), Wang J(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Miami, Department of Neurological Surgery, The Miami Project to 
Cure Paralysis, Miami, FL 33136, United States; University of Wisconsin - 
Milwaukee, Department of Kinesiology, Milwaukee, WI 53201, United States. 
Electronic address: yxl907@miami.edu.
(2)University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee, Department of Kinesiology, Milwaukee, WI 
53201, United States.

Sensorimotor adaptation can be induced by action observation, and also by 
passive training. Here, we investigated the effect of a protocol that combined 
action observation and passive training on visuomotor adaptation, by comparing 
it with the effect of action observation or passive training alone. Subjects 
were divided into five conditions during the training session: (1) action 
observation, in which the subjects watched a video of a model who adapted to a 
novel visuomotor rotation; (2) proprioceptive training, in which the subject's 
arm was moved passively to target locations that were associated with desired 
trajectories; (3) combined training, in which the subjects watched the video of 
a model during a half of the session and experienced passive movements during 
the other half; (4) active training, in which the subjects adapted actively to 
the rotation; and (5) a control condition, in which the subjects did not perform 
any task. Following that session, all subjects adapted to the same visuomotor 
rotation. Results showed that the subjects in the combined training condition 
adapted to the rotation significantly better than those in the observation or 
proprioceptive training condition, although their performance was not as good as 
that of those who adapted actively. These findings suggest that although a 
protocol that combines action observation and passive training consists of all 
the processes involved in active training (error detection and correction, 
effector-specific and proprioceptively based reaching movements), these 
processes in that protocol may work differently as compared to a protocol in 
which the same processes are engaged actively.

Copyright © 2016 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2016.06.011
PMID: 27298007 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


274. J Neurophysiol. 2016 Aug 1;116(2):411-24. doi: 10.1152/jn.00830.2015. Epub 2016 
Apr 27.

Target size matters: target errors contribute to the generalization of implicit 
visuomotor learning.

Reichenthal M(1), Avraham G(2), Karniel A(2), Shmuelof L(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, 
Beersheva, Israel; Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, Ben-Gurion 
University of the Negev, Beersheva, Israel; and.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, 
Beersheva, Israel; Zlotowski Center for Neuroscience, Ben-Gurion University of 
the Negev, Beersheva, Israel.
(3)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the 
Negev, Beersheva, Israel; Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, Ben-Gurion 
University of the Negev, Beersheva, Israel; and Zlotowski Center for 
Neuroscience, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beersheva, Israel 
shmuelof@bgu.ac.il.

The process of sensorimotor adaptation is considered to be driven by errors. 
While sensory prediction errors, defined as the difference between the planned 
and the actual movement of the cursor, drive implicit learning processes, target 
errors (e.g., the distance of the cursor from the target) are thought to drive 
explicit learning mechanisms. This distinction was mainly studied in the context 
of arm reaching tasks where the position and the size of the target were 
constant. We hypothesize that in a dynamic reaching environment, where subjects 
have to hit moving targets and the targets' dynamic characteristics affect task 
success, implicit processes will benefit from target errors as well. We examine 
the effect of target errors on learning of an unnoticed perturbation during 
unconstrained reaching movements. Subjects played a Pong game, in which they had 
to hit a moving ball by moving a paddle controlled by their hand. During the 
game, the movement of the paddle was gradually rotated with respect to the hand, 
reaching a final rotation of 25°. Subjects were assigned to one of two groups: 
The high-target error group played the Pong with a small ball, and the 
low-target error group played with a big ball. Before and after the Pong game, 
subjects performed open-loop reaching movements toward static targets with no 
visual feedback. While both groups adapted to the rotation, the postrotation 
reaching movements were directionally biased only in the small-ball group. This 
result provides evidence that implicit adaptation is sensitive to target errors.

Copyright © 2016 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00830.2015
PMCID: PMC4969381
PMID: 27121580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Neuroimage. 2017 Apr 15;150:200-212. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.02.043. Epub 
2017 Feb 17.

On the neural basis of sensory weighting: Alpha, beta and gamma modulations 
during complex movements.

Lebar N(1), Danna J(1), Moré S(1), Mouchnino L(1), Blouin J(2).

Author information:
(1)Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, LNC, FR3C 3512, Marseille, France.
(2)Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, LNC, FR3C 3512, Marseille, France. Electronic 
address: jean.blouin@univ-amu.fr.

Previous studies have revealed that visual and somatosensory information is 
processed as a function of its relevance during movement execution. We thus 
performed spectral decompositions of ongoing neural activities within the 
somatosensory and visual areas while human participants performed a complex 
visuomotor task. In this task, participants followed the outline of irregular 
polygons with a pen-controlled cursor. At unpredictable times, the motion of the 
cursor deviated 120° with respect to the actual pen position creating an 
incongruence between visual and somatosensory inputs, thus increasing the 
importance of visual feedback to control the movement as suggested in previous 
studies. We found that alpha and beta power significantly decreased in the 
visual cortex during sensory incongruence when compared to unperturbed 
conditions. This result is in line with an increased gain of visual inputs 
during sensory incongruence. In parallel, we also found a simultaneous decrease 
of gamma and beta power in sensorimotor areas which has not been reported 
previously. The gamma desynchronization suggests a reduced integration of 
somatosensory inputs for controlling movements with sensory incongruence while 
beta ERD could be more specifically linked to sensorimotor adaptation processes.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.02.043
PMID: 28215622 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2019 Jan;33(1):70-81. doi: 10.1177/1545968318818902. 
Epub 2018 Dec 29.

A Single Session of Robot-Controlled Proprioceptive Training Modulates 
Functional Connectivity of Sensory Motor Networks and Improves Reaching Accuracy 
in Chronic Stroke.

Vahdat S(1)(2), Darainy M(1), Thiel A(1)(3), Ostry DJ(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)1 McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada.
(2)2 University of Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada.
(3)3 Jewish General Hospital and Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, 
Montréal, QC, Canada.
(4)4 Haskins Laboratories, New Haven, CT, USA.

BACKGROUND: Passive robot-generated arm movements in conjunction with 
proprioceptive decision making and feedback modulate functional connectivity 
(FC) in sensory motor networks and improve sensorimotor adaptation in normal 
individuals. This proof-of-principle study investigates whether these effects 
can be observed in stroke patients.
METHODS: A total of 10 chronic stroke patients with a range of stable motor and 
sensory deficits (Fugl-Meyer Arm score [FMA] 0-65, Nottingham Sensory Assessment 
[NSA] 10-40) underwent resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging 
before and after a single session of robot-controlled proprioceptive training 
with feedback. Changes in FC were identified in each patient using independent 
component analysis as well as a seed region-based approach. FC changes were 
related to impairment and changes in task performance were assessed.
RESULTS: A single training session improved average arm reaching accuracy in 6 
and proprioception in 8 patients. Two networks showing training-associated FC 
change were identified. Network C1 was present in all patients and network C2 
only in patients with FM scores >7. Relatively larger C1 volume in the 
ipsilesional hemisphere was associated with less impairment ( r = 0.83 for NSA, 
r = 0.73 for FMA). This association was driven by specific regions in the 
contralesional hemisphere and their functional connections (supramarginal gyrus 
with FM scores r = 0.82, S1 with NSA scores r = 0.70, and cerebellum with NSA 
score r = -0.82).
CONCLUSION: A single session of robot-controlled proprioceptive training with 
feedback improved movement accuracy and induced FC changes in sensory motor 
networks of chronic stroke patients. FC changes are related to functional 
impairment and comprise bilateral sensory and motor network nodes.

DOI: 10.1177/1545968318818902
PMCID: PMC6389407
PMID: 30595082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Neurophysiol. 2017 Aug 1;118(2):666-676. doi: 10.1152/jn.00834.2016. Epub 2017 
Mar 29.

Estimating the implicit component of visuomotor rotation learning by 
constraining movement preparation time.

Leow LA(1), Gunn R(2), Marinovic W(2)(3), Carroll TJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Sensorimotor Performance, School of Human Movement and Nutrition 
Sciences, Building 26B, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, 
Australia; and l.leow@uq.edu.au.
(2)Centre for Sensorimotor Performance, School of Human Movement and Nutrition 
Sciences, Building 26B, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, 
Australia; and.
(3)School of Psychology and Speech Pathology, Curtin University, Bentley, 
Western Australia, Australia.

When sensory feedback is perturbed, accurate movement is restored by a 
combination of implicit processes and deliberate reaiming to strategically 
compensate for errors. Here, we directly compare two methods used previously to 
dissociate implicit from explicit learning on a trial-by-trial basis: 1) asking 
participants to report the direction that they aim their movements, and 
contrasting this with the directions of the target and the movement that they 
actually produce, and 2) manipulating movement preparation time. By instructing 
participants to reaim without a sensory perturbation, we show that reaiming is 
possible even with the shortest possible preparation times, particularly when 
targets are narrowly distributed. Nonetheless, reaiming is effortful and comes 
at the cost of increased variability, so we tested whether constraining 
preparation time is sufficient to suppress strategic reaiming during adaptation 
to visuomotor rotation with a broad target distribution. The rate and extent of 
error reduction under preparation time constraints were similar to estimates of 
implicit learning obtained from self-report without time pressure, suggesting 
that participants chose not to apply a reaiming strategy to correct visual 
errors under time pressure. Surprisingly, participants who reported aiming 
directions showed less implicit learning according to an alternative measure, 
obtained during trials performed without visual feedback. This suggests that the 
process of reporting can affect the extent or persistence of implicit learning. 
The data extend existing evidence that restricting preparation time can suppress 
explicit reaiming and provide an estimate of implicit visuomotor rotation 
learning that does not require participants to report their aiming 
directions.NEW & NOTEWORTHY During sensorimotor adaptation, implicit 
error-driven learning can be isolated from explicit strategy-driven reaiming by 
subtracting self-reported aiming directions from movement directions, or by 
restricting movement preparation time. Here, we compared the two methods. 
Restricting preparation times did not eliminate reaiming but was sufficient to 
suppress reaiming during adaptation with widely distributed targets. The 
self-report method produced a discrepancy in implicit learning estimated by 
subtracting aiming directions and implicit learning measured in no-feedback 
trials.

Copyright © 2017 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00834.2016
PMCID: PMC5539449
PMID: 28356480 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Neuroreport. 2007 Aug 6;18(12):1207-13. doi: 10.1097/WNR.0b013e328244e6c3.

Spatial remapping of the visual world across saccades.

Bays PM(1), Husain M.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, Institute of Neurology, University 
College London, Queen Square, London, UK. p.bays@ion.ucl.ac.uk

Recent research has identified neurons in the visual system that remap their 
receptive fields before a saccade. The activity of these neurons may signal a 
prediction of postsaccadic visual input, derived from an efference copy of 
saccadic motor output. Such a prediction is often thought to underlie our 
perception of a stable visual world, by compensating for the shifts in retinal 
image that accompany each eye movement. Here we review the evidence, and 
conclude that prediction does not in fact play a significant role in maintaining 
visual stability. Instead, we consider a novel perspective in which the primary 
function of spatial remapping is to support three key nonperceptual processes: 
action control, sensorimotor adaptation and spatial memory.

DOI: 10.1097/WNR.0b013e328244e6c3
PMCID: PMC2531238
PMID: 17632269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Exp Brain Res. 2008 Sep;190(3):317-28. doi: 10.1007/s00221-008-1472-z. Epub 2008 
Jul 1.

Degree of handedness affects intermanual transfer of skill learning.

Chase C(1), Seidler R.

Author information:
(1)Division of Kinesiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2214, 
USA.

Intermanual transfer of skill learning has often been used as a paradigm to 
study functional specialization and hemispheric interactions in relation to 
handedness. This literature has not evaluated whether degree of handedness 
impacts learning and intermanual transfer. Because handedness scores are related 
to factors that might influence intermanual transfer, such as engagement of the 
ipsilateral hemisphere during movement (Dassonville et al. in Proc Natl Acad Sci 
USA 94:14015-14018, 1997) and corpus callosum volume (Witelson in Science 
229:665-668, 1985; Brain 112:799-835, 1989), we tested whether degree of 
handedness is correlated with transfer magnitude. We had groups of left and 
right handed participants perform a sensorimotor adaptation task and a sequence 
learning task. Following learning with either the dominant or nondominant hand, 
participants transferred to task performance with the other hand. We evaluated 
whether the magnitude of learning and intermanual transfer were influenced by 
either direction and/or degree of handedness. Participants exhibited faster 
sensorimotor adaptation with the right hand, regardless of whether they were 
right or left handed. In addition, less strongly left handed individuals 
exhibited better intermanual transfer of sensorimotor adaptation, while less 
strongly right handed individuals exhibited better intermanual transfer of 
sequence learning. The findings suggest that involvement of the ipsilateral 
hemisphere during learning may influence intermanual transfer magnitude.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-008-1472-z
PMCID: PMC2570758
PMID: 18592225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


280. PLoS One. 2010 Sep 24;5(9):e12975. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012975.

Auditory-motor learning during speech production in 9-11-year-old children.

Shiller DM(1), Gracco VL, Rvachew S.

Author information:
(1)École d'orthophonie et d'audiologie, Université de Montréal, Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada. douglas.shiller@umontreal.ca

BACKGROUND: Hearing ability is essential for normal speech development, however 
the precise mechanisms linking auditory input and the improvement of speaking 
ability remain poorly understood. Auditory feedback during speech production is 
believed to play a critical role by providing the nervous system with 
information about speech outcomes that is used to learn and subsequently 
fine-tune speech motor output. Surprisingly, few studies have directly 
investigated such auditory-motor learning in the speech production of typically 
developing children.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In the present study, we manipulated auditory 
feedback during speech production in a group of 9-11-year old children, as well 
as in adults. Following a period of speech practice under conditions of altered 
auditory feedback, compensatory changes in speech production and perception were 
examined. Consistent with prior studies, the adults exhibited compensatory 
changes in both their speech motor output and their perceptual representations 
of speech sound categories. The children exhibited compensatory changes in the 
motor domain, with a change in speech output that was similar in magnitude to 
that of the adults, however the children showed no reliable compensatory effect 
on their perceptual representations.
CONCLUSIONS: The results indicate that 9-11-year-old children, whose speech 
motor and perceptual abilities are still not fully developed, are nonetheless 
capable of auditory-feedback-based sensorimotor adaptation, supporting a role 
for such learning processes in speech motor development. Auditory feedback may 
play a more limited role, however, in the fine-tuning of children's perceptual 
representations of speech sound categories.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012975
PMCID: PMC2945760
PMID: 20886033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


281. Exp Brain Res. 2011 Sep;213(2-3):245-56. doi: 10.1007/s00221-011-2723-y. Epub 
2011 May 20.

It is all me: the effect of viewpoint on visual-vestibular recalibration.

Schomaker J(1), Tesch J, Bülthoff HH, Bresciani JP.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics, Tübingen, Germany.

Participants performed a visual-vestibular motor recalibration task in virtual 
reality. The task consisted of keeping the extended arm and hand stable in space 
during a whole-body rotation induced by a robotic wheelchair. Performance was 
first quantified in a pre-test in which no visual feedback was available during 
the rotation. During the subsequent adaptation phase, optical flow resulting 
from body rotation was provided. This visual feedback was manipulated to create 
the illusion of a smaller rotational movement than actually occurred, hereby 
altering the visual-vestibular mapping. The effects of the adaptation phase on 
hand stabilization performance were measured during a post-test that was 
identical to the pre-test. Three different groups of subjects were exposed to 
different perspectives on the visual scene, i.e., first-person, top view, or 
mirror view. Sensorimotor adaptation occurred for all three viewpoint 
conditions, performance in the post-test session showing a marked 
under-compensation relative to the pre-test performance. In other words, all 
viewpoints gave rise to a remapping between vestibular input and the motor 
output required to stabilize the arm. Furthermore, the first-person and mirror 
view adaptation induced a significant decrease in variability of the 
stabilization performance. Such variability reduction was not observed for the 
top view adaptation. These results suggest that even if all three viewpoints can 
evoke substantial adaptation aftereffects, the more naturalistic first-person 
view and the richer mirror view should be preferred when reducing motor 
variability constitutes an important issue.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-011-2723-y
PMID: 21597929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Exp Brain Res. 2009 Feb;193(2):189-96. doi: 10.1007/s00221-008-1607-2. Epub 2008 
Oct 24.

The effect of cerebellar cortical degeneration on adaptive plasticity and 
movement control.

Werner S(1), Bock O, Timmann D.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Physiology and Anatomy, German Sport University, 50927 Cologne, 
Germany. Werner@dshs-koeln.de

Clinical and neuroimaging studies provide converging evidence that the 
cerebellum plays an important role for sensorimotor adaptation by participating 
in the adaptive process per se, and/or by evaluating motor performance errors as 
a prerequisite for adaptation. Recent experimental evidence suggests that error 
signals pertinent to adaptation are related to sensory prediction rather than to 
online corrections (Tseng et al. in J Neurophysiol 98(1):54-62, 2007). To 
further elucidate the role of the cerebellum, the present study uses a multiple 
regression approach to separate out three independent determinants of adaptive 
success. Seventeen patients with cerebellar atrophy but without extra-cerebellar 
lesions, and 17 healthy, sex- and age-matched controls participated. Both 
subject groups performed center-out pointing movements before, during, and after 
exposure to 60 degrees rotated visual feedback. From the registered data, we 
quantified four indicators of adaptive success (adaptive improvement, retention 
without feedback, intermanual transfer, and de-adaptation under normal 
feedback), as well as five measures of motor performance (reaction time, peak 
velocity, movement time, response variability, and ability for online error 
corrections). The variance of each adaptation indicator was then partitioned 
into three components, one related to subject group but not to motor 
performance, a second related to group and motor performance, and a third 
related to motor performance but not to group. In accordance with previous work, 
adaptation and motor performance were degraded in patients. The deficit was 
similar in magnitude for all four adaptation indicators, which suggests that 
adaptive recalibration rather than strategic control were affected in our 
patients. No adaptation indicator shared statistically significant variance with 
group alone; we therefore found no evidence for cerebellar circuitry dedicated 
to adaptation but not motor performance. Three indicators shared significant 
variance jointly with group and motor performance; this suggests that the 
cerebellar contribution to motor performance is related to adaptive success. All 
four indicators shared significant variance with motor performance alone; this 
indicates that extracerebellar contributions to motor performance are also 
related to adaptive success. In conclusion, our data support the view that 
neural structures inside and outside the cerebellum are processing motor 
performance-related signals as a prerequisite for adaptation, but provide no 
evidence for a cerebellar structure related exclusively to adaptation.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-008-1607-2
PMID: 18949468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Neurosci. 2014 Jul 30;34(31):10339-46. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0108-14.2014.

Plasticity in the human speech motor system drives changes in speech perception.

Lametti DR(1), Rochet-Capellan A(2), Neufeld E(3), Shiller DM(4), Ostry DJ(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, McGill University, Montréal, Quebec, Canada H3A 
1B1, Institute of Neurology, University College London, London, United Kingdom, 
WC1N 3BG.
(2)GIPSA-LAB, Département Parole and Cognition, CNRS and Grenoble Université, 
Grenoble, France.
(3)Department of Psychology, McGill University, Montréal, Quebec, Canada H3A 
1B1.
(4)School of Speech Pathology and Audiology, Université de Montréal, Montréal, 
Quebec, Canada H3N 1X7, Research Center, Sainte-Justine Hospital, Université de 
Montréal, Montréal, Quebec, Canada H3T 1C5, Centre for Research on Brain, 
Language & Music, Montréal, Canada H3G 2A8, and.
(5)Department of Psychology, McGill University, Montréal, Quebec, Canada H3A 
1B1, Haskins Laboratories, New Haven, Connecticut 06511 david.ostry@mcgill.ca.

Recent studies of human speech motor learning suggest that learning is 
accompanied by changes in auditory perception. But what drives the perceptual 
change? Is it a consequence of changes in the motor system? Or is it a result of 
sensory inflow during learning? Here, subjects participated in a speech 
motor-learning task involving adaptation to altered auditory feedback and they 
were subsequently tested for perceptual change. In two separate experiments, 
involving two different auditory perceptual continua, we show that changes in 
the speech motor system that accompany learning drive changes in auditory speech 
perception. Specifically, we obtained changes in speech perception when 
adaptation to altered auditory feedback led to speech production that fell into 
the phonetic range of the speech perceptual tests. However, a similar change in 
perception was not observed when the auditory feedback that subjects' received 
during learning fell into the phonetic range of the perceptual tests. This 
indicates that the central motor outflow associated with vocal sensorimotor 
adaptation drives changes to the perceptual classification of speech sounds.

Copyright © 2014 the authors 0270-6474/14/3410339-08$15.00/0.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0108-14.2014
PMCID: PMC4115140
PMID: 25080594 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Cortex. 2018 Feb;99:55-68. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2017.10.019. Epub 2017 Nov 13.

Stuttering adults' lack of pre-speech auditory modulation normalizes when 
speaking with delayed auditory feedback.

Daliri A(1), Max L(2).

Author information:
(1)Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, United States. Electronic address: 
Ayoub.Daliri@asu.edu.
(2)University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States; Haskins Laboratories, 
New Haven, CT, United States.

Auditory modulation during speech movement planning is limited in adults who 
stutter (AWS), but the functional relevance of the phenomenon itself remains 
unknown. We investigated for AWS and adults who do not stutter (AWNS) (a) a 
potential relationship between pre-speech auditory modulation and auditory 
feedback contributions to speech motor learning and (b) the effect on pre-speech 
auditory modulation of real-time versus delayed auditory feedback. Experiment I 
used a sensorimotor adaptation paradigm to estimate auditory-motor speech 
learning. Using acoustic speech recordings, we quantified subjects' formant 
frequency adjustments across trials when continually exposed to formant-shifted 
auditory feedback. In Experiment II, we used electroencephalography to determine 
the same subjects' extent of pre-speech auditory modulation (reductions in 
auditory evoked potential N1 amplitude) when probe tones were delivered prior to 
speaking versus not speaking. To manipulate subjects' ability to monitor 
real-time feedback, we included speaking conditions with non-altered auditory 
feedback (NAF) and delayed auditory feedback (DAF). Experiment I showed that 
auditory-motor learning was limited for AWS versus AWNS, and the extent of 
learning was negatively correlated with stuttering frequency. Experiment II 
yielded several key findings: (a) our prior finding of limited pre-speech 
auditory modulation in AWS was replicated; (b) DAF caused a decrease in auditory 
modulation for most AWNS but an increase for most AWS; and (c) for AWS, the 
amount of auditory modulation when speaking with DAF was positively correlated 
with stuttering frequency. Lastly, AWNS showed no correlation between pre-speech 
auditory modulation (Experiment II) and extent of auditory-motor learning 
(Experiment I) whereas AWS showed a negative correlation between these measures. 
Thus, findings suggest that AWS show deficits in both pre-speech auditory 
modulation and auditory-motor learning; however, limited pre-speech modulation 
is not directly related to limited auditory-motor adaptation; and in AWS, DAF 
paradoxically tends to normalize their otherwise limited pre-speech auditory 
modulation.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cortex.2017.10.019
PMCID: PMC5801108
PMID: 29169049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Psychol Forsch. 1974 Apr 4;36(4):321-8. doi: 10.1007/BF00424569.

Generalized sensorimotor adaptation with diminished feedback.

Mikaelian HH.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00424569
PMID: 4844181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Exp Brain Res. 2013 Jul;228(3):327-39. doi: 10.1007/s00221-013-3565-6. Epub 2013 
May 23.

Adapting to inversion of the visual field: a new twist on an old problem.

Lillicrap TP(1), Moreno-Briseño P, Diaz R, Tweed DB, Troje NF, Fernandez-Ruiz J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Oxford, Mansfield Road, Oxford, OX1 
3QT, UK. timothy.lillicrap@pharm.ox.ac.uk

While sensorimotor adaptation to prisms that displace the visual field takes 
minutes, adapting to an inversion of the visual field takes weeks. In spite of a 
long history of the study, the basis of this profound difference remains poorly 
understood. Here, we describe the computational issue that underpins this 
phenomenon and presents experiments designed to explore the mechanisms involved. 
We show that displacements can be mastered without altering the updated rule 
used to adjust the motor commands. In contrast, inversions flip the sign of 
crucial variables called sensitivity derivatives-variables that capture how 
changes in motor commands affect task error and therefore require an update of 
the feedback learning rule itself. Models of sensorimotor learning that assume 
internal estimates of these variables are known and fixed predicted that when 
the sign of a sensitivity derivative is flipped, adaptations should become 
increasingly counterproductive. In contrast, models that relearn these 
derivatives predict that performance should initially worsen, but then improve 
smoothly and remain stable once the estimate of the new sensitivity derivative 
has been corrected. Here, we evaluated these predictions by looking at human 
performance on a set of pointing tasks with vision perturbed by displacing and 
inverting prisms. Our experimental data corroborate the classic observation that 
subjects reduce their motor errors under inverted vision. Subjects' accuracy 
initially worsened and then improved. However, improvement was jagged rather 
than smooth and performance remained unstable even after 8 days of continually 
inverted vision, suggesting that subjects improve via an unknown mechanism, 
perhaps a combination of cognitive and implicit strategies. These results offer 
a new perspective on classic work with inverted vision.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-013-3565-6
PMID: 23700129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Child Neuropsychol. 2017 May;23(4):463-482. doi: 10.1080/09297049.2016.1170797. 
Epub 2016 Apr 19.

Mirror-drawing skill in children with specific language impairment: Improving 
generalization by incorporating variability into the practice session.

Desmottes L(1), Maillart C(1), Meulemans T(2).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Speech and Language Therapy , University of Liege , Liège , 
Belgium.
(2)b Department of Psychology , University of Liege , Liège , Belgium.

This study aimed to investigate the procedural deficit hypothesis (PDH) in 
children with specific language impairment (SLI) by using a mirror-drawing task, 
a sensorimotor adaptation paradigm that does not involve sequence learning and 
has never before been used in SLI. A total of 30 school-aged children with SLI 
matched to 30 typically developing (TD) control children had to trace several 
figures seen only in mirror-reversed view in two practice sessions separated by 
a one-week interval. Two practice conditions were compared: a constant condition 
in which children had to trace the same figure throughout the learning trials, 
and a variable one in which they had to trace different figures in each trial. 
The results revealed a similar learning pattern between SLI and TD children in 
both practice conditions, suggesting that initial learning for a non-sequential 
procedural task is preserved in SLI. However, the children with SLI generalized 
the mirror-drawing skill in the same way as the TD children only if there was 
variability in the way the material was trained (variable practice). No 
significant schedule effects were observed in the control group.

DOI: 10.1080/09297049.2016.1170797
PMID: 27093974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


288. J Neurophysiol. 2010 Dec;104(6):2913-21. doi: 10.1152/jn.00225.2010. Epub 2010 
Sep 29.

Visuomotor learning generalizes between bilateral and unilateral conditions 
despite varying degrees of bilateral interference.

Wang J(1), Mordkoff JT, Sainburg RL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Movement Sciences, 491 Enderis Hall, University of 
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53201, USA. wang34@uwm.edu

Bilateral interference, referring to the tendency of movements of one arm to 
disrupt the intended movements made simultaneously with the other arm, is often 
observed in a task that involves differential planning of each arm movement 
during sensorimotor adaptation. In the present study, we examined two questions: 
1) how does the compatibility between visuomotor adaptation tasks performed with 
both arms affect bilateral interference during bimanual performance? and 2) how 
do variations in bilateral interference affect transfer of visuomotor adaptation 
between bilateral and unilateral conditions? To examine these questions, we 
manipulated visuomotor compatibility using two kinematic variables (direction of 
required hand motion, direction of an imposed visual rotation). Experiment 1 
consisted of two conditions in which the direction of visual rotations for both 
arms was either in the same or opposing directions, whereas the target direction 
for both arms was always the same. In experiment 2, we examined the pattern of 
generalization between the bilateral and unilateral conditions when both the 
target and rotation directions were opposing between the arms. In both 
experiments, subjects first adapted to a 30° visual rotation with one arm 
(preunilateral), then with both arms (bilateral), and finally with the arm that 
was not used in the first session (postunilateral). Our results show that 
bilateral interference was smallest when both variables were the same between 
the arms. Our data also show extensive transfer of visuomotor adaptation between 
bilateral and unilateral conditions, regardless of degree of bilateral 
interference.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00225.2010
PMCID: PMC3007628
PMID: 20881203 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


289. IEEE Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng. 2012 May;20(3):286-96. doi: 
10.1109/TNSRE.2012.2190827. Epub 2012 Apr 16.

Learning, retention, and slacking: a model of the dynamics of recovery in robot 
therapy.

Casadio M(1), Sanguineti V.

Author information:
(1)Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. 
maura.casadio@unige.it

Quantitative descriptions of the process of recovery of motor functions in 
impaired subjects during robot-assisted exercise might help to understand how to 
use these devices to make recovery faster and more effective. Linear dynamical 
models have been used to describe the dynamics of sensorimotor adaptation. Here, 
we extend this formalism to characterize the neuromotor recovery process. We 
focus on a robot therapy experiment that involved chronic stroke survivors, 
based on a robot-assisted arm extension task. The results suggest that modeling 
the recovery process with dynamical models is feasible, and could allow 
predicting the long-term outcome of a robot-assisted rehabilitation treatment.

DOI: 10.1109/TNSRE.2012.2190827
PMID: 22531822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Psychiatr Res. 2017 Jun;89:73-80. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2017.01.014. Epub 
2017 Jan 31.

Over facilitation of unadapted cognitive processes in obsessive compulsive 
disorder as assessed with the computerized mirror pointing task.

Dulude G(1), O'Connor K(2), Audet JS(2), Bedard MA(3).

Author information:
(1)Université du Québec à Montréal (UQAM), Montréal, Canada; Montreal Mental 
Health University Institute, Montréal, Canada.
(2)Montreal Mental Health University Institute, Montréal, Canada; Université de 
Montréal, Montréal, Canada.
(3)Université du Québec à Montréal (UQAM), Montréal, Canada; Montreal 
Neurological Institute (MNI), Canada. Electronic address: 
bedard.marc-andre@uqam.ca.

Response inhibition has been suggested to be dysfunctional in 
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). However, this process involves intentional 
cognitive control, which does not correspond to the automatic emergence of 
stereotyped thoughts and behaviours usually reported by patients with OCD. In 
the present study, the excessive facilitation of unintentional processes was 
assessed in OCD by using the Computerized Mirror Pointing Task (CMPT). 
Seventy-six volunteers participated in this study, including 39 patients with 
OCD and 37 healthy controls. The CMPT was administered to all participants, and 
a score of appropriateness of the sensorimotor adaptation to the mirror 
inversion was computed from the initial deviation angle (IDA), that precedes the 
intentional readjustment of movement. Results showed that throughout the 40 
trials of the CMPT, the IDA score remained significantly abnormal in patients 
with OCD in comparison with control participants. Further analyses of IDA scores 
in OCD revealed a clear tendency to keep a natural visuomotor processing that is 
rigid and unadapted to the mirror condition. Irrespective of the physical 
requirements of the environment, patients with OCD showed a strong tendency to 
initiate movements as per a previously consolidated - although unadapted - 
sensorimotor mapping. This suggests a tendency for an excessive facilitation of 
unintentional stereotyped processes. Further studies should be conducted on this 
question by using tasks sensitive to cognitive processes other than 
visuo-spatial abilities.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2017.01.014
PMID: 28182963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


291. J Autism Dev Disord. 2016 Feb;46(2):502-13. doi: 10.1007/s10803-015-2588-1.

Low Fidelity Imitation of Atypical Biological Kinematics in Autism Spectrum 
Disorders Is Modulated by Self-Generated Selective Attention.

Hayes SJ(1), Andrew M(2), Elliott D(2)(3), Gowen E(4), Bennett SJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Brain and Behaviour Laboratory, Faculty of Science, Research Institute for 
Sport and Exercise Sciences, Liverpool John Moores University, Byrom Street, 
Liverpool, L3 3AF, UK. s.hayes@ljmu.ac.uk.
(2)Brain and Behaviour Laboratory, Faculty of Science, Research Institute for 
Sport and Exercise Sciences, Liverpool John Moores University, Byrom Street, 
Liverpool, L3 3AF, UK.
(3)Department of Kinesiology, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(4)Faculty of Life Sciences, The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

We examined whether adults with autism had difficulty imitating atypical 
biological kinematics. To reduce the impact that higher-order processes have on 
imitation we used a non-human agent model to control social attention, and 
removed end-state target goals in half of the trials to minimise goal-directed 
attention. Findings showed that only neurotypical adults imitated atypical 
biological kinematics. Adults with autism did, however, become significantly 
more accurate at imitating movement time. This confirmed they engaged in the 
task, and that sensorimotor adaptation was self-regulated. The attentional bias 
to movement time suggests the attenuation in imitating kinematics might be a 
compensatory strategy due to deficits in lower-level visuomotor processes 
associated with self-other mapping, or selective attention modulated the 
processes that represent biological kinematics.

DOI: 10.1007/s10803-015-2588-1
PMID: 26349922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


292. IEEE Int Conf Rehabil Robot. 2009 Jun;2009:474-479. doi: 
10.1109/ICORR.2009.5209528.

Negative viscosity can enhance learning of inertial dynamics.

Huang FC(1), Patton JL(1), Mussa-Ivaldi FA(1).

Author information:
(1)Sensory Motor Performance Program, Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago, 
Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, 345 East Superior St., Room 1406, Chicago, 
IL 60611, USA. ; Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Mechanical and Biomedical 
Engineering, Northwestern University.

We investigated how learning of inertial load manipulation is influenced by 
movement amplification with negative viscosity. Using a force-feedback device, 
subjects trained on anisotropic loads (5 orientations) with free movements in 
one of three conditions (inertia only, negative viscosity only, or combined), 
prior to common evaluation conditions (prescribed circular pattern with inertia 
only). Training with Combined-Load resulted in lower error (6.89±3.25%) compared 
to Inertia-Only (8.40±4.32%) and Viscosity-Only (8.17±4.13%) according to radial 
deviation analysis (% of trial mean radius). Combined-Load and Inertia-Only 
groups exhibited similar unexpected no-load trials (8.38±4.31% versus 8.91±4.70% 
of trial mean radius), which suggests comparable low-impedance strategies. These 
findings are remarkable since negative viscosity, only available during 
training, evidently enhanced learning when combined with inertia. Modeling 
analysis suggests that a feedforward after-effect of negative viscosity cannot 
predict such performance gains. Instead, results from Combined-Load training are 
consistent with greater feedforward inertia compensation along with a small 
increase in impedance control. The capability of the nervous system to 
generalize learning from negative viscosity suggests an intriguing new method 
for enhancing sensorimotor adaptation.

DOI: 10.1109/ICORR.2009.5209528
PMCID: PMC4568763
PMID: 26380041


293. Exp Brain Res. 2006 Aug;173(3):487-97. doi: 10.1007/s00221-006-0394-x. Epub 2006 
Feb 28.

Acquiring and adapting a novel audiomotor map in human grasping.

Säfström D(1), Edin BB.

Author information:
(1)Physiology Section, Department of Integrative Medical Biology, Umeå 
University, Umeå, Sweden. Daniel.Safstrom@physiol.umu.se

For sensorimotor transformations to be executed accurately, there must be 
mechanisms that can both establish and modify mappings between sensory and motor 
coordinates. Such mechanisms were investigated in normal subjects using a 
reach-to-grasp task. First, we replaced the normal input of visual information 
about object size with auditory information, i.e., we attempted to establish an 
'audiomotor map'. The size of the object was log linearly related to the 
frequency of the sound, and we measured the maximum grip aperture (MGA) during 
the reaching phase to determine if the subjects had learned the relationship. 
Second, we changed the frequency-object size relationship to study adaptation in 
the newly acquired map. Our results demonstrate that learning of an audiomotor 
map consisted of three distinct phases: during the first stage (approximately 
10-15 trials) subjects simply used MGAs large enough to grasp any reasonably 
sized object and there were no overt signs of learning. During the second stage, 
there was a period of fast learning where the slope of the relationship between 
MGA and object size became steeper until the third stage where the slope was 
constant. In contrast, when sensorimotor adaptation was studied in the 
established audiomotor map, there was rapid learning from the start of a size 
perturbation. We conclude that different learning strategies are employed when 
sensorimotor transformations are established compared to when existing 
transformations are modified.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-006-0394-x
PMID: 16506001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Neuroimage. 2017 Feb 1;146:81-89. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.11.009. Epub 
2016 Nov 12.

Neuronal correlates of continuous manual tracking under varying visual movement 
feedback in a virtual reality environment.

Limanowski J(1), Kirilina E(2), Blankenburg F(3).

Author information:
(1)Neurocomputation and Neuroimaging Unit, Department of Education and 
Psychology, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany; Center for Cognitive 
Neuroscience Berlin, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany. Electronic 
address: jakub.limanowski@fu-berlin.de.
(2)Neurocomputation and Neuroimaging Unit, Department of Education and 
Psychology, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany; Center for Cognitive 
Neuroscience Berlin, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany; Department of 
Neurophysics, Max Planck Institute for Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, 
Germany.
(3)Neurocomputation and Neuroimaging Unit, Department of Education and 
Psychology, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany; Center for Cognitive 
Neuroscience Berlin, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

To accurately guide one's actions online, the brain predicts sensory action 
feedback ahead of time based on internal models, which can be updated by sensory 
prediction errors. The underlying operations can be experimentally investigated 
in sensorimotor adaptation tasks, in which moving under perturbed sensory action 
feedback requires internal model updates. Here we altered healthy participants' 
visual hand movement feedback in a virtual reality setup, while assessing brain 
activity with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Participants tracked 
a continually moving virtual target object with a photorealistic, 
three-dimensional (3D) virtual hand controlled online via a data glove. During 
the continuous tracking task, the virtual hand's movements (i.e., visual 
movement feedback) were repeatedly periodically delayed, which participants had 
to compensate for to maintain accurate tracking. This realistic task design 
allowed us to simultaneously investigate processes likely operating at several 
levels of the brain's motor control hierarchy. FMRI revealed that the length of 
visual feedback delay was parametrically reflected by activity in the inferior 
parietal cortex and posterior temporal cortex. Unpredicted changes in visuomotor 
mapping (at transitions from synchronous to delayed visual feedback periods or 
vice versa) activated biological motion-sensitive regions in the lateral 
occipitotemporal cortex (LOTC). Activity in the posterior parietal cortex (PPC), 
focused on the contralateral anterior intraparietal sulcus (aIPS), correlated 
with tracking error, whereby this correlation was stronger in participants with 
higher tracking performance. Our results are in line with recent proposals of a 
wide-spread cortical motor control hierarchy, where temporoparietal regions seem 
to evaluate visuomotor congruence and thus possibly ground a self-attribution of 
movements, the LOTC likely processes early visual prediction errors, and the 
aIPS computes action goal errors and possibly corresponding motor corrections.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.11.009
PMID: 27845254 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Elife. 2016 Nov 2;5:e16394. doi: 10.7554/eLife.16394.

Direction-dependent arm kinematics reveal optimal integration of gravity cues.

Gaveau J(1), Berret B(2)(3), Angelaki DE(4), Papaxanthis C(1).

Author information:
(1)Université Bourgogne Franche-Comté, INSERM CAPS UMR 1093, Dijon, France.
(2)CIAMS, Université Paris-Sud, Université Paris Saclay, Orsay, France.
(3)CIAMS, Université d'Orléans, Orléans, France.
(4)Department of Neuroscience, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, United 
States.

The brain has evolved an internal model of gravity to cope with life in the 
Earth's gravitational environment. How this internal model benefits the 
implementation of skilled movement has remained unsolved. One prevailing theory 
has assumed that this internal model is used to compensate for gravity's 
mechanical effects on the body, such as to maintain invariant motor 
trajectories. Alternatively, gravity force could be used purposely and 
efficiently for the planning and execution of voluntary movements, thereby 
resulting in direction-depending kinematics. Here we experimentally interrogate 
these two hypotheses by measuring arm kinematics while varying movement 
direction in normal and zero-G gravity conditions. By comparing experimental 
results with model predictions, we show that the brain uses the internal model 
to implement control policies that take advantage of gravity to minimize 
movement effort.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.16394
PMCID: PMC5117856
PMID: 27805566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that no competing interests 
exist.


296. Exp Brain Res. 2012 Dec;223(4):457-67. doi: 10.1007/s00221-012-3273-7. Epub 2012 
Sep 25.

Functional relationship between cognitive representations of movement directions 
and visuomotor adaptation performance.

Lex H(1), Weigelt M, Knoblauch A, Schack T.

Author information:
(1)Neurocognition and Action-Research Group, Bielefeld University, PO-Box 100 
131, 33501, Bielefeld, Germany, heiko.lex@uni-bielefeld.de

The aim of our study was to explore whether or not different types of learners 
in a sensorimotor task possess characteristically different cognitive 
representations. Participants' sensorimotor adaptation performance was measured 
with a pointing paradigm which used a distortion of the visual feedback in terms 
of a left-right reversal. The structure of cognitive representations was 
assessed using a newly established experimental method, the Cognitive 
Measurement of Represented Directions. A post hoc analysis revealed 
inter-individual differences in participants' adaptation performance, and three 
different skill levels (skilled, average, and poor adapters) have been defined. 
These differences in performance were correlated with the structure of 
participants' cognitive representations of movement directions. Analysis of 
these cognitive representations revealed performance advantages for participants 
possessing a global cognitive representation of movement directions (aligned to 
cardinal movement axes), rather than a local representation (aligned to each 
neighboring direction). Our findings are evidence that cognitive representation 
structures play a functional role in adaptation performance.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-012-3273-7
PMID: 23007723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Annu Int Conf IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2011;2011:7262-5. doi: 
10.1109/IEMBS.2011.6091835.

Visuomotor discordance in virtual reality: effects on online motor control.

Bagce HF(1), Saleh S, Adamovich SV, Tunik E.

Author information:
(1)School of Health Related Professions, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, 
University of Medicine and Dentistry, Newark, NJ 07107, USA.

Virtual reality (VR) applications are rapidly permeating fields such as 
medicine, rehabilitation, research, and military training. However, VR-induced 
effects on human performance remain poorly understood, particularly in relation 
to fine-grained motor control of the hand and fingers. We designed a novel 
virtual reality environment suitable for hand-finger interactions and examined 
the ability to use visual feedback manipulations in VR to affect online motor 
performance. Ten healthy subjects performed a simple finger flexion movement 
toward a kinesthetically-defined 45° target angle while receiving one of three 
types of VR-based visual feedback in real-time: veridical (in which the virtual 
hand motion corresponded to subjects' actual motion), or scaled-down / scaled-up 
feedback (in which virtual finger motion was scaled by 25% / 175% relative to 
actual motion). Scaled down-and scaled-up feedback led to significant online 
modifications (increases and decreases, respectively) in angular excursion, 
despite explicit instructions for subjects to maintain constant movements across 
conditions. The latency of these modifications was similar across conditions. 
These findings demonstrate that a VR-based platform may be a robust medium for 
presenting visuomotor discordances to engender a sense of ownership and drive 
sensorimotor adaptation for (retraining motor skills. This may prove to be 
particularly important for retraining motor skills in patients with 
neurologically-based movement disorders.

DOI: 10.1109/IEMBS.2011.6091835
PMCID: PMC3954637
PMID: 22256015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Cerebellum. 2010 Dec;9(4):580-6. doi: 10.1007/s12311-010-0201-x.

An explicit strategy prevails when the cerebellum fails to compute movement 
errors.

Taylor JA(1), Klemfuss NM, Ivry RB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, 3210 Tolman 
Hall #1650, Berkeley, CA 94720-1650, USA. jordan.a.taylor@berkeley.edu

In sensorimotor adaptation, explicit cognitive strategies are thought to be 
unnecessary because the motor system implicitly corrects performance throughout 
training. This seemingly automatic process involves computing an error between 
the planned movement and actual feedback of the movement. When explicitly 
provided with an effective strategy to overcome an experimentally induced visual 
perturbation, people are immediately successful and regain good task 
performance. However, as training continues, their accuracy gets worse over 
time. This counterintuitive result has been attributed to the independence of 
implicit motor processes and explicit cognitive strategies. The cerebellum has 
been hypothesized to be critical for the computation of the motor error signals 
that are necessary for implicit adaptation. We explored this hypothesis by 
testing patients with cerebellar degeneration on a motor learning task that puts 
the explicit and implicit systems in conflict. Given this, we predicted that the 
patients would be better than controls in maintaining an effective strategy 
assuming strategic and adaptive processes are functionally and neurally 
independent. Consistent with this prediction, the patients were easily able to 
implement an explicit cognitive strategy and showed minimal interference from 
undesirable motor adaptation throughout training. These results further reveal 
the critical role of the cerebellum in an implicit adaptive process based on 
movement errors and suggest an asymmetrical interaction of implicit and explicit 
processes.

DOI: 10.1007/s12311-010-0201-x
PMCID: PMC2996538
PMID: 20697860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Exp Brain Res. 1999 Oct;128(3):410-6. doi: 10.1007/s002210050862.

Long-term adaptation of postural control in microgravity.

Baroni G(1), Ferrigno G, Rabuffetti M, Pedotti A, Massion J.

Author information:
(1)Bioengineering Center, Politecnico di Milano - Fondazione Pro Juventute Don 
Carlo Gnocchi, Via Gozzadini 7, I-20148 Milano, Italy, baroni@mail.cbi.polimi.it

Orbital microgravity represents a unique environment, which allows the isolation 
of variables assumed to be involved in the mechanism of body positioning in 
space. In this context, the alignment of the trunk axis along allocentric 
references and the positioning of the body center of mass inside the supporting 
base compete for the role of the primary-controlled variable when assuming erect 
posture. This paper reports the quantitative evaluation of the postural 
strategies exhibited by two subjects with feet fixed to the floor of the space 
module along a 4-month period of exposure to microgravity. With respect to 
previous findings in parabolic flights and short term space missions, the 
analysis focused on long-term process of sensorimotor adaptation to 
weightlessness. Results show that while trunk-axis orientation is preserved and 
used as a stable postural frame of reference, the positioning of the body center 
of mass appears to be significantly biased backward and turns out to be involved 
in a long-term process of adaptation throughout the entire flight towards the 
re-emergence of a typically terrestrial postural regulation compatible with 
equilibrium.

DOI: 10.1007/s002210050862
PMID: 10501814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Psychol Forsch. 1968;32(3):219-43. doi: 10.1007/BF00418661.

[Sensorimotor adaptation to displaced visual feedback from own bodily movement].

[Article in German]

Becker-Carus C.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00418661
PMID: 5715147 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Comp Physiol A Neuroethol Sens Neural Behav Physiol. 2005 Sep;191(9):845-56. 
doi: 10.1007/s00359-005-0006-4. Epub 2005 Sep 13.

Species-specific differences in sensorimotor adaptation are correlated with 
differences in social structure.

Oestreich J(1), Zakon HH.

Author information:
(1)Section of Neurobiology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, 
USA.

Here, we report a species difference in the strength and duration of long-term 
sensorimotor adaptation in the electromotor output of weakly electric fish. The 
adaptation is produced by changes in intrinsic excitability in the electromotor 
pacemaker nucleus; this change is a form of memory that correlates with social 
structure. A weakly electric fish may be jammed by a similar electric organ 
discharge (EOD) frequency of another fish and prevents jamming by transiently 
raising its own emission frequency, a behavior called the jamming avoidance 
response (JAR). The JAR requires activation of NMDA receptors, and prolonged JAR 
performance results in long-term frequency elevation (LTFE) of a fish's EOD 
frequency for many hours after the jamming stimulus. We find that LTFE is 
stronger in a shoaling species (Eigenmannia virescens) with a higher probability 
of encountering jamming conspecifics, when compared to a solitary species 
(Apteronotus leptorhynchus). Additionally, LTFE persists in Eigenmannia, 
whereas, it decays over 5-9 h in Apteronotus.

DOI: 10.1007/s00359-005-0006-4
PMID: 16007457 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Front Integr Neurosci. 2014 Sep 29;8:75. doi: 10.3389/fnint.2014.00075. 
eCollection 2014.

A simple computational principle predicts vocal adaptation dynamics across age 
and error size.

Kelly CW(1), Sober SJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Emory University Atlanta, GA, USA.

The brain uses sensory feedback to correct errors in behavior. Songbirds and 
humans acquire vocal behaviors by imitating the sounds produced by adults and 
rely on auditory feedback to correct vocal errors throughout their lifetimes. In 
both birds and humans, acoustic variability decreases steadily with age 
following the acquisition of vocal behavior. Prior studies in adults have shown 
that while sensory errors that fall within the limits of vocal variability evoke 
robust motor corrections, larger errors do not induce learning. Although such 
results suggest that younger animals, which have greater vocal variability, 
might correct large errors more readily than older individuals, it is unknown 
whether age-dependent changes in variability are accompanied by changes in the 
speed or magnitude of vocal error correction. We tested the hypothesis that 
auditory errors evoke greater vocal changes in younger animals and that a common 
computation determines how sensory information drives motor learning across 
different ages and error sizes. Consistent with our hypothesis, we found that in 
songbirds the speed and extent of error correction changes dramatically with age 
and that age-dependent differences in learning were predicted by a model in 
which the overlap between sensory errors and the distribution of prior sensory 
feedback determines the dynamics of adaptation. Our results suggest that the 
brain employs a simple and robust computational principle to calibrate the rate 
and magnitude of vocal adaptation across age-dependent changes in behavioral 
performance and in response to different sensory errors.

DOI: 10.3389/fnint.2014.00075
PMCID: PMC4178380
PMID: 25324740


303. Front Hum Neurosci. 2010 Jan 4;3:65. doi: 10.3389/neuro.09.065.2009. eCollection 
2010.

Discordant Tasks and Motor Adjustments Affect Interactions between Adaptations 
to Altered Kinematics and Dynamics.

Arce F(1), Novick I, Vaadia E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Neurobiology, The Institute for Medical Research 
Israel-Canada, Hadassah Medical School, Hebrew University Jerusalem, Israel.

Motor control and adaptation are multi-determinate processes with complex 
interactions. This is reflected for example in the ambiguous nature of 
interactions during sequential adaptation of reaching under kinematics and 
dynamics perturbations. It has been suggested that perturbations based on the 
same kinematic parameter interfere. Others posited that opposing motor 
adjustments underlie interference. Here, we examined the influence of 
discordances in task and in motor adjustments on sequential adaptations to 
visuomotor rotation and viscous force field perturbations. These two factors - 
perturbation direction and task discordance - have been examined separately by 
previous studies, thus the inherent difficulty to identify the roots of 
interference. Forty-eight human subjects adapted sequentially to one or two 
types of perturbations, of matched or conflicting directions. We found a 
gradient of interaction effects based on perturbation direction and task 
discordance. Perturbations of matched directions showed facilitation while 
perturbations of opposite directions, which required opposing motor adjustments, 
interfered with each other. Further, interaction effects increased with greater 
task discordance. We also found that force field and visuomotor rotation had 
mutual anterograde and retrograde effects. However, we found independence 
between anterograde and retrograde interferences between similar tasks. The 
results suggest that the newly acquired internal models of kinematic and dynamic 
perturbations are not independent but they share common neuronal resources and 
interact between them. Such overlap does not necessarily imply competition of 
resources. Rather, our results point to an additional principle of sensorimotor 
adaptation allowing the system to tap or harness common features across diverse 
sensory inputs and task contexts whenever available.

DOI: 10.3389/neuro.09.065.2009
PMCID: PMC2806051
PMID: 20130760


304. Exp Brain Res. 2006 Sep;174(2):270-8. doi: 10.1007/s00221-006-0446-2. Epub 2006 
Apr 26.

The effect of trial number on the emergence of the 'broken escalator' locomotor 
aftereffect.

Bunday KL(1), Reynolds RF, Kaski D, Rao M, Salman S, Bronstein AM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Movement and Balance, Division of Neuroscience and Mental 
Health, Imperial College London, Charing Cross Hospital, London, W6 8RF, UK.

Walking onto a stationary platform, which had been previously experienced as 
moving generates a locomotor aftereffect (LAE), which resembles the 'broken 
escalator' phenomenon. Experimentally, this is achieved by having subjects walk 
initially onto a stationary sled (BEFORE condition), then onto a moving sled 
(MOVING condition, or adaptation trials) and then again onto the stationary sled 
(AFTER condition). Subjects are always appropriately warned of the change in 
conditions. In this paper, we ask how many adaptation trials are needed to 
produce such a LAE. Thus, in two experiments, the number of MOVING trials was 
varied between 20 and 5 (Experiment 1) and between 8 and 1 (Experiment 2). Gait 
velocity, trunk position, foot contact timing and EMG of the ankle 
flexor-extensors muscles were measured. In comparison with BEFORE trials all 
groups in the AFTER trials walked inappropriately fast, experienced a large 
overshoot of the trunk and showed increased leg EMG, indicating that all groups 
showed a LAE. In each experiment, and for all variables, no significant 
difference between the groups (i.e. 20 down to one MOVING trials) was found. The 
study shows that this LAE, in contrast to other motor aftereffects reported in 
the literature, can be generated with only one or two adaptation trials and 
without requiring unexpected 'catch' trials. The fast aftereffect generation 
observed is likely to depend on two types of mechanisms: (1) the nature of the 
sensorimotor adaptation process, involving multiple sensory feedbacks (visual, 
vestibular and proprioceptive), anticipatory control and large initial task 
errors and (2) the involvement of two phylogenetically old neural mechanisms, 
namely locomotion and fear. Fear-relevant mechanisms, which are notably 
resistant to cognitive control, may be recruited during the adaptation trials 
and contribute to the release of this LAE.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-006-0446-2
PMID: 16639502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


305. BMC Neurol. 2013 Dec 18;13:205. doi: 10.1186/1471-2377-13-205.

Study protocol to examine the effects of spaceflight and a spaceflight analog on 
neurocognitive performance: extent, longevity, and neural bases.

Koppelmans V, Erdeniz B, De Dios YE, Wood SJ, Reuter-Lorenz PA, Kofman I, 
Bloomberg JJ, Mulavara AP, Seidler RD(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Kinesiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor MI, USA. 
rseidler@umich.edu.

BACKGROUND: Long duration spaceflight (i.e., 22 days or longer) has been 
associated with changes in sensorimotor systems, resulting in difficulties that 
astronauts experience with posture control, locomotion, and manual control. The 
microgravity environment is an important causal factor for spaceflight induced 
sensorimotor changes. Whether spaceflight also affects other central nervous 
system functions such as cognition is yet largely unknown, but of importance in 
consideration of the health and performance of crewmembers both in- and 
post-flight. We are therefore conducting a controlled prospective longitudinal 
study to investigate the effects of spaceflight on the extent, longevity and 
neural bases of sensorimotor and cognitive performance changes. Here we present 
the protocol of our study.
METHODS/DESIGN: This study includes three groups (astronauts, bed rest subjects, 
ground-based control subjects) for which each the design is single group with 
repeated measures. The effects of spaceflight on the brain will be investigated 
in astronauts who will be assessed at two time points pre-, at three time points 
during-, and at four time points following a spaceflight mission of six months. 
To parse out the effect of microgravity from the overall effects of spaceflight, 
we investigate the effects of seventy days head-down tilted bed rest. Bed rest 
subjects will be assessed at two time points before-, two time points during-, 
and three time points post-bed rest. A third group of ground based controls will 
be measured at four time points to assess reliability of our measures over time. 
For all participants and at all time points, except in flight, measures of 
neurocognitive performance, fine motor control, gait, balance, structural MRI 
(T1, DTI), task fMRI, and functional connectivity MRI will be obtained. In 
flight, astronauts will complete some of the tasks that they complete pre- and 
post flight, including tasks measuring spatial working memory, sensorimotor 
adaptation, and fine motor performance. Potential changes over time and 
associations between cognition, motor-behavior, and brain structure and function 
will be analyzed.
DISCUSSION: This study explores how spaceflight induced brain changes impact 
functional performance. This understanding could aid in the design of targeted 
countermeasures to mitigate the negative effects of long-duration spaceflight.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2377-13-205
PMCID: PMC3878338
PMID: 24350728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Neurophysiol. 2017 Nov 1;118(5):2670-2686. doi: 10.1152/jn.00326.2016. Epub 
2017 Aug 23.

Distinct coordinate systems for adaptations of movement direction and extent.

Poh E(1)(2), Carroll TJ(2), de Rugy A(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey.
(2)Centre for Sensorimotor Performance, School of Human Movement and Nutrition 
Sciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia; and.
(3)Centre for Sensorimotor Performance, School of Human Movement and Nutrition 
Sciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia; and 
aymar.derugy@u-bordeaux.fr.
(4)Institut de Neurosciences Cognitives et Intégratives d'Aquitaine, CNRS UMR 
5287, Université de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.

Learned compensations for perturbed visual feedback of movement extent and 
direction generalize differently to unpracticed movement directions, which 
suggests different underlying neural mechanisms. Here we investigated whether 
gain and rotation adaptations are consistent with representation in different 
coordinate systems. Subjects performed a force-aiming task with the wrist and 
learned different gains or rotations for different force directions. 
Generalization was tested without visual feedback for the same extrinsic 
directions but with the forearm in a different pronation-supination orientation. 
When the change in forearm orientation caused the adapted visuomotor map to 
conflict in extrinsic and joint-based coordinates, rotation generalization 
occurred in extrinsic coordinates but with reduced magnitude. In contrast, gain 
generalization appeared reduced and phase shifted. When the forearm was rotated 
further, such that all imposed perturbations aligned in both joint-based and 
extrinsic coordinates in both postures, rotation generalization was further 
reduced, whereas there was neither reduction nor phase shift in the pattern of 
extent generalization. These results show that rotation generalization was 
expressed in extrinsic coordinates, and that generalization magnitude was 
modulated by posture. In contrast, gain generalization appeared to depend on 
target direction defined by an integrated combination of extrinsic and 
joint-based coordinates and was not reduced substantially by posture changes 
alone. Although the quality of the model fit underlying our interpretation 
prevents us from making strong conclusions, the data suggest that adaptations of 
movement direction and extent are represented according to distinct coordinate 
systems.NEW & NOTEWORTHY Visuomotor gain and rotation adaptations generalize 
differently to novel movement directions, which suggests different neural 
mechanisms. When extrinsic and joint-based coordinates are effectively 
dissociated in an isometric aiming task, we find that they also generalize in 
different coordinate systems. Specifically, rotation generalized in extrinsic 
coordinates and decayed as posture departed from that adopted during adaptation. 
In contrast, gain generalization was expressed according to mixed 
extrinsic/joint-based coordinates and was not substantially reduced by postural 
changes.

Copyright © 2017 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00326.2016
PMCID: PMC5672543
PMID: 28835524 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Age (Dordr). 2014 Apr;36(2):823-37. doi: 10.1007/s11357-013-9601-4. Epub 2013 
Nov 22.

Balance control interferes with the tracing performance of a pattern with 
mirror-reversed vision in older persons.

Lemieux LG(1), Simoneau M, Tessier JF, Billot M, Blouin J, Teasdale N.

Author information:
(1)Faculté de médecine, Département de kinésiologie, Université Laval, 2300, rue 
de la Terrasse, Quebec, Quebec, Canada, G1V 0A6.

When tracing a template with mirror-reversed vision (or distorted vision), the 
sensory information arising from the movement does not match the expected 
sensory consequences. In such situations, participants have to learn a new 
visuomotor mapping in order to trace the template with an accuracy and speed 
approaching that observed when tracing with direct vision. There are several 
suggestions that such visuomotor learning requires lowering the gain of the 
proprioceptive inputs. Generally, subjects learn this task in a seated condition 
offering a stable postural platform. Adapting to the new visuomotor relationship 
in a standing condition could add complexity and even hinder sensorimotor 
adaptation because balance control and processing of additional information 
typically interfere with each other. To examine this possibility, older 
individuals and young adults (on average, 70 and 22 years of age, respectively) 
were assigned to groups that trained to trace a shape with mirror-reversed 
vision in a seated or a standing condition for two sessions. For a third 
session, the seated groups (young and elderly) transferred to the standing 
condition while the standing groups continued to perform the tracing task while 
standing. This procedure allowed comparing the tracing performance of all groups 
(with the same amount of practice) in a standing condition. The standing groups 
also did a fourth session in a seated condition. Results show that older 
participants initially exposed to the standing condition were much slower to 
trace the template than all other groups (including the older group that 
performed the tracing task while seated). This slowness did not result from a 
baseline general slowness but from a genuine interference between balance 
control and the visuomotor conflict resulting from tracing the pattern with 
mirror-reversed vision. Besides, the Standing-Old participants that transferred 
to a seated condition in the fourth session immediately improved their tracing 
by reducing the total displacement covered by the pen to trace the template. 
Interestingly, the results did not support a transfer-appropriate practice 
hypothesis which suggests that training in a standing condition (at the third 
session) should have benefited the performance of those individuals who 
initially learned to trace the mirror pattern in a standing condition. This has 
important clinical implications: training at adapting to new sensory contexts or 
environmental conditions in conditions that do not challenge balance control 
could be necessary if one desires to attenuate the detrimental consequences on 
the postural or motor performances brought up by the interference between 
maintaining balance and the sensory reweighing processes.

DOI: 10.1007/s11357-013-9601-4
PMCID: PMC4039253
PMID: 24258770 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Exp Brain Res. 2007 Aug;181(2):321-32. doi: 10.1007/s00221-007-0929-9. Epub 2007 
Mar 20.

Is the brain able to capture a new temporal relationship between a motor action 
and its consequence?

Berrigan F(1), Simoneau M.

Author information:
(1)Faculté de Médecine, Division de kinésiologie, Université Laval, PEPS, 
Quebec, QC, Canada.

This study investigated how the brain can learn new temporal relationships 
between the predicted and actual consequences of a descending motor command. We 
chose a long and a short delay to assess cognitive and sensorimotor adaptation, 
respectively. Cognitive adaptation, in contrast to sensorimotor adaptation, 
would use higher cognitive mechanisms requiring attention and working memory 
associated with temporal processing. A horizontal cable, attached at pelvis 
level, was used to suspend a load that tended to move participants backwards. In 
experiment 1, the participants (n = 10) controlled unloading of the cable, which 
induced a forward destabilization. Three blocks of trials were performed. The 
first (PRE) and third (POST) blocks contained 30 trials each. For these 
conditions, the mechanical consequences of cable unloading were directly 
transmitted to the participants. The second block (DELAY) contained 60 trials. 
In this condition, a constant 600-ms delay was introduced between the motor 
action and the mechanical consequences of unloading. To determine whether the 
duration of the delay or the number of trials could explain the absence of 
prediction, we tested eight different participants (experiment 2). These 
participants first performed 15 imposed unloading trials (IMPOSED). In this 
condition, the experimenter controlled the onset of the unloading. Then, the 
participants were exposed to 120 self-triggered trials; the mechanical 
consequences of cable unloading were directly transmitted to the participants. 
Finally, four participants were exposed to a delay of 300 ms, whereas the other 
four were exposed to a delay of 600 ms. All the participants performed 120 
delayed trials. Results of the first experiment revealed that when the 
participants controlled the timing of unloading and there was no delay, they 
activated their gastrocnemius (GM) muscle before unloading (120 ms and 126 ms 
for PRE and POST condition, respectively). When the unloading occurred 600 ms 
later, however, participants did not anticipate the unloading; their GM muscle 
onset followed the unloading. Across trials, however, they adapted their balance 
strategy as they decreased the activity of their tibialis anterior, and GM 
muscle onset occurred earlier than during imposed unloading. Nonetheless, 
overall participants succeeded in decreasing their peak center of mass velocity 
and center of mass and center of pressure ranges. Results from the second 
experiment showed that GM muscle onset occurred earlier than during imposed 
unloading for both delayed unloadings. Moreover, data for the shorter delay 
(i.e., 300 ms) showed that participants adapted their balance strategy response; 
their GM muscle onset occurred before the delayed unloading. Although, 
increasing the number of 600 ms delayed unloading (i.e., 60 to 120 trials) did 
not allow the brain to anticipate the unloading. In summary, the results of the 
present study suggest that the brain could adjust to some extent its balance 
control strategy when the temporal relationship between the motor action and its 
consequence was delayed. Nonetheless, cognitive adaptation would be limited 
compared to sensorimotor adaptation.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-007-0929-9
PMID: 17372724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


309. J Acoust Soc Am. 2010 Oct;128(4):2033-48. doi: 10.1121/1.3479539.

Adaptive auditory feedback control of the production of formant trajectories in 
the Mandarin triphthong /iau/ and its pattern of generalization.

Cai S(1), Ghosh SS, Guenther FH, Perkell JS.

Author information:
(1)Speech and Hearing Bioscience and Technology Program, Harvard-MIT Division of 
Health Sciences and Technology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 
Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.

In order to test whether auditory feedback is involved in the planning of 
complex articulatory gestures in time-varying phonemes, the current study 
examined native Mandarin speakers' responses to auditory perturbations of their 
auditory feedback of the trajectory of the first formant frequency during their 
production of the triphthong /iau/. On average, subjects adaptively adjusted 
their productions to partially compensate for the perturbations in auditory 
feedback. This result indicates that auditory feedback control of speech 
movements is not restricted to quasi-static gestures in monophthongs as found in 
previous studies, but also extends to time-varying gestures. To probe the 
internal structure of the mechanisms of auditory-motor transformations, the 
pattern of generalization of the adaptation learned on the triphthong /iau/ to 
other vowels with different temporal and spatial characteristics (produced only 
under masking noise) was tested. A broad but weak pattern of generalization was 
observed; the strength of the generalization diminished with increasing 
dissimilarity from /iau/. The details and implications of the pattern of 
generalization are examined and discussed in light of previous sensorimotor 
adaptation studies of both speech and limb motor control and a 
neurocomputational model of speech motor control.

DOI: 10.1121/1.3479539
PMCID: PMC2981117
PMID: 20968374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Alcohol. 2012 Feb;46(1):75-88. doi: 10.1016/j.alcohol.2011.06.001. Epub 2011 Aug 
4.

Blood alcohol concentration at 0.06 and 0.10% causes a complex multifaceted 
deterioration of body movement control.

Modig F(1), Fransson PA, Magnusson M, Patel M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund, Lund University, Lund S-221 85, 
Sweden.

Alcohol-related falls are recognized as a major contributor to the occurrence of 
traumatic brain injury. The control of upright standing balance is complex and 
composes of contributions from several partly independent mechanisms such as 
appropriate information from multiple sensory systems and correct feedback and 
feed forward movement control. Analysis of multisegmented body movement offers a 
rarely used option for detecting the fine motor problems associated with alcohol 
intoxication. The study aims were to investigate whether (1) alcohol 
intoxication at 0.06 and 0.10% blood alcohol concentration (BAC) affected the 
body movements under unperturbed and perturbed standing; and (2) alcohol 
affected the ability for sensorimotor adaptation. Body movements were recorded 
in 25 participants (13 women and 12 men, mean age 25.1 years) at five locations 
(ankle, knee, hip, shoulder, and head) during quiet standing and during balance 
perturbations from pseudorandom pulses of calf muscle vibration over 200s with 
eyes closed or open. Tests were performed at 0.00, 0.06, and 0.10% BAC. The 
study revealed several significant findings: (1) an alcohol dose-specific 
effect; (2) a direction-specific stability decrease from alcohol intoxication; 
(3) a movement pattern change related to the level of alcohol intoxication 
during unperturbed standing and perturbed standing; (4) a sensorimotor 
adaptation deterioration with increased alcohol intoxication; and (5) that 
vision provided a weaker contribution to postural control during alcohol 
intoxication. Hence, alcohol intoxication at 0.06 and 0.10% BAC causes a complex 
multifaceted deterioration of human postural control.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.alcohol.2011.06.001
PMID: 21816558 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Hear Res. 2018 Sep;367:137-148. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2018.05.017. Epub 2018 May 
26.

Topography of sound level representation in the FM sweep selective region of the 
pallid bat auditory cortex.

Measor K(1), Yarrow S(2), Razak KA(3).

Author information:
(1)Graduate Neuroscience Program, University of California, Riverside, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of California, Riverside, CA, USA.
(3)Graduate Neuroscience Program, University of California, Riverside, CA, USA; 
Department of Psychology, University of California, Riverside, CA, USA. 
Electronic address: Khaleel@ucr.edu.

Sound level processing is a fundamental function of the auditory system. To 
determine how the cortex represents sound level, it is important to quantify how 
changes in level alter the spatiotemporal structure of cortical ensemble 
activity. This is particularly true for echolocating bats that have control 
over, and often rapidly adjust, call level to actively change echo level. To 
understand how cortical activity may change with sound level, here we mapped 
response rate and latency changes with sound level in the auditory cortex of the 
pallid bat. The pallid bat uses a 60-30 kHz downward frequency modulated (FM) 
sweep for echolocation. Neurons tuned to frequencies between 30 and 70 kHz in 
the auditory cortex are selective for the properties of FM sweeps used in 
echolocation forming the FM sweep selective region (FMSR). The FMSR is strongly 
selective for sound level between 30 and 50 dB SPL. Here we mapped the 
topography of level selectivity in the FMSR using downward FM sweeps and show 
that neurons with more monotonic rate level functions are located in caudomedial 
regions of the FMSR overlapping with high frequency (50-60 kHz) neurons. 
Non-monotonic neurons dominate the FMSR, and are distributed across the entire 
region, but there is no evidence for amplitopy. We also examined how first spike 
latency of FMSR neurons change with sound level. The majority of FMSR neurons 
exhibit paradoxical latency shift wherein the latency increases with sound 
level. Moreover, neurons with paradoxical latency shifts are more strongly level 
selective and are tuned to lower sound level than neurons in which latencies 
decrease with level. These data indicate a clustered arrangement of neurons 
according to monotonicity, with no strong evidence for finer scale topography, 
in the FMSR. The latency analysis suggests mechanisms for strong level 
selectivity that is based on relative timing of excitatory and inhibitory 
inputs. Taken together, these data suggest how the spatiotemporal spread of 
cortical activity may represent sound level.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.heares.2018.05.017
PMID: 29853324 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Acta Physiol (Oxf). 2013 May;208(1):111-24. doi: 10.1111/apha.12081. Epub 2013 
Mar 11.

Accuracy of pointing movements relies upon a specific tuning between 
anticipatory postural adjustments and prime mover activation.

Caronni A(1), Bolzoni F, Esposti R, Bruttini C, Cavallari P.

Author information:
(1)Human Physiology Section of the DePT, Università degli Studi di Milano, 
Milan, Italy.

AIM: Equilibrium-perturbing forces associated with a voluntary upper-limb 
movement can be strong enough to displace the whole-body centre of mass. In this 
condition, anticipatory postural adjustments (APAs), developing in muscles other 
than the prime mover, are essential in maintaining the whole-body balance. Here, 
we test the hypothesis that APAs preceding an upper-limb target-reaching 
movement could play a role also in controlling the movement accuracy.
METHODS: Standing subjects (10) were asked to flex the right shoulder and touch 
with the index fingertip the centre of a target positioned in front of them. The 
reaching task was also performed while wearing and after doffing prismatic 
lenses (shifting the eye field rightward). EMGs from different upper- and 
lower-limb muscles and the mechanical actions to the ground were recorded.
RESULTS: (i) Before wearing prisms, subjects were very accurate in hitting the 
target, and the pointing movements were accompanied by APAs in quadriceps (Q) 
and tibialis anterior (TA) of both sides, and in right hamstrings (H) and soleus 
(SOL). (ii) After donning prisms, rightward pointing errors occurred, associated 
with a significant APA increase in right Q and TA, but without changes in the 
recruitment of right anterior deltoid (prime mover) and biceps brachii. (iii) 
These pointing errors were progressively compensated in about 10 trials, 
indicating a sensorimotor adaptation, and APAs returned to values recorded 
before wearing prisms. (iv) After doffing prisms, pointing errors occurred in 
the opposite direction but changes in APAs did not reach significance.
CONCLUSION: We propose that, besides preserving the whole-body balance, APAs are 
also tailored to obtain an accurate voluntary movement.

Acta Physiologica © 2013 Scandinavian Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/apha.12081
PMID: 23398738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Vis. 2009 Apr 30;9(4):27.1-11. doi: 10.1167/9.4.27.

Quantifying the effect of natural and arbitrary sensorimotor contingencies on 
chromatic judgments.

Richters DP(1), Eskew RT Jr.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115, USA. 
daverichters@mac.com

When a body movement systematically co-occurs with a stimulus, a change in 
perception to compensate for this correlation may occur. In Experiment 1 
(similar to A. Bompas & J. K. O'Regan, 2006), we induced a correlation between 
leftward eye saccades and a red stimulus, and rightward eye saccades and a green 
stimulus. In a subsequent test phase, observers compared the color of two 
stimuli after leftward and rightward saccades. The major result was that stimuli 
tended to look greener after a leftward saccade and redder after a rightward 
saccade (A. Bompas & J. K. O'Regan, 2006). Measured here in meaningful units for 
the first time, the shift in the point of subjective equality was approximately 
d' = 0.4, a remarkably large effect for only 40 minutes of eye movement/color 
exposure. A control experiment ruled out a simple reduction in initial bias as 
the cause of the effect. In Experiment 2, we hypothesized that the blue of the 
sky might cause an initial bias to judge spots seen with upward gaze as 
"yellower"; this expectation was not met, but the basic effect was replicated 
and extended to other chromaticities and eye movement directions. Experiment 3 
substituted listening to tones for the eye movements (a sensorisensory 
correlation) to explore differences between sensorimotor adaptation and sensory 
integration; neither effect was found for our task. Sensorimotor adaptation can 
be a remarkably powerful influence on perception; because it operates in a 
compensatory direction, it may oppose the effects of sensory integration, 
depending upon task demands.

DOI: 10.1167/9.4.27
PMID: 19757936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Front Neurosci. 2018 Feb 5;12:27. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2018.00027. eCollection 
2018.

Gestational Exposure to the Synthetic Cathinone Methylenedioxypyrovalerone 
Results in Reduced Maternal Care and Behavioral Alterations in Mouse Pups.

Gerecsei LI(1), Csillag A(1), Zachar G(1), Gévai L(2), Simon L(2), Dobolyi 
Á(1)(3), Ádám Á(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, Semmelweis University, 
Budapest, Hungary.
(2)Laboratory of Sensorimotor Adaptation, Semmelweis University, Budapest, 
Hungary.
(3)MTA-ELTE Laboratory of Molecular and Systems Neurobiology, Institute of 
Biology, Hungarian Academy of Sciences and Eötvös Loránd University, Budapest, 
Hungary.

The member of synthetic cathinone family, methylenedioxypyrovalerone (MDPV), is 
a frequently used psychoactive drug of abuse. The objective of our study was to 
determine the effect of MDPV (administered from the 8th to the 14th day of 
gestation) on the behavior of neonatal and adolescent mice, as well as its 
effect on maternal care. We measured maternal care (pup retrieval test, nest 
building), locomotor activity (open field test), and motor coordination (grip 
strength test) of dams, whereas on pups we examined locomotor activity at 
postnatal day 7 and day 21 (open field test) and motor coordination on day 21 
(grip strength test). On fresh-frozen brain samples of the dams we examined the 
expression of two important peptides implicated in the regulation of maternal 
behavior and lactation: tuberoinfundibular peptide 39 (TIP39) mRNA in the 
thalamic posterior intralaminar complex, and amylin mRNA in the medial preoptic 
nucleus. We detected decreased birth rate and survival of offspring, and reduced 
maternal care in the drug-treated animals, whereas there was no difference 
between the motility of treated and control mothers. Locomotor activity of the 
pups was increased in the MDPV treated group both at 7 and 21 days of age, while 
motor coordination was unaffected by MDPV treatment. TIP39 and amylin were 
detected in their typical location but failed to show a significant difference 
of expression between the drug-treated and control groups. The results suggest 
that chronic systemic administration of the cathinone agent MDPV to pregnant 
mice can reduce birth rate and maternal care, and it also enhances motility 
(without impairment of motor coordination) of the offspring.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2018.00027
PMCID: PMC5807393
PMID: 29459818


315. J Neurophysiol. 2014 Feb;111(3):628-40. doi: 10.1152/jn.00457.2013. Epub 2013 
Nov 13.

Association of COMT val158met and DRD2 G>T genetic polymorphisms with individual 
differences in motor learning and performance in female young adults.

Noohi F(1), Boyden NB, Kwak Y, Humfleet J, Burke DT, Müller ML, Bohnen NI, 
Seidler RD.

Author information:
(1)School of Kinesiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan;

Individuals learn new skills at different rates. Given the involvement of 
corticostriatal pathways in some types of learning, variations in dopaminergic 
transmission may contribute to these individual differences. Genetic 
polymorphisms of the catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) enzyme and dopamine 
receptor D2 (DRD2) genes partially determine cortical and striatal dopamine 
availability, respectively. Individuals who are homozygous for the COMT 
methionine (met) allele show reduced cortical COMT enzymatic activity, resulting 
in increased dopamine levels in the prefrontal cortex as opposed to individuals 
who are carriers of the valine (val) allele. DRD2 G-allele homozygotes benefit 
from a higher striatal dopamine level compared with T-allele carriers. We 
hypothesized that individuals who are homozygous for COMT met and DRD2 G alleles 
would show higher rates of motor learning. Seventy-two young healthy females (20 
± 1.9 yr) performed a sensorimotor adaptation task and a motor sequence learning 
task. A nonparametric mixed model ANOVA revealed that the COMT val-val group 
demonstrated poorer performance in the sequence learning task compared with the 
met-met group and showed a learning deficit in the visuomotor adaptation task 
compared with both met-met and val-met groups. The DRD2 TT group showed poorer 
performance in the sequence learning task compared with the GT group, but there 
was no difference between DRD2 genotype groups in adaptation rate. Although 
these results did not entirely come out as one might predict based on the known 
contribution of corticostriatal pathways to motor sequence learning, they 
support the role of genetic polymorphisms of COMT val158met (rs4680) and DRD2 
G>T (rs 1076560) in explaining individual differences in motor performance and 
motor learning, dependent on task type.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00457.2013
PMCID: PMC3921405
PMID: 24225542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2021 Mar 22:S0149-7634(21)00124-X. doi: 
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.03.011. Online ahead of print.

Cerebellar morphology and behavioural correlations of the vestibular function 
alterations in weightlessness.

Kharlamova A(1), Proshchina A(2), Gulimova V(2), Krivova Y(2), Soldatov P(3), 
Saveliev S(2).

Author information:
(1)Research Institute of Human Morphology, 117418, Tsyurupy St., 3, Moscow, 
Russia. Electronic address: grossulyar@gmail.com.
(2)Research Institute of Human Morphology, 117418, Tsyurupy St., 3, Moscow, 
Russia.
(3)State Scientific Center of Russian Federation Institute of Biomedical 
Problems of the Russian Academy of Sciences, 123007, Khoroshevskoyoe shosse, 
76A, Moscow, Russia.

In humans and other vertebrates, the range of disturbances and behavioural 
changes induced by spaceflight conditions are well known. Sensory organs and the 
central nervous system (CNS) are forced to adapt to new environmental conditions 
of weightlessness. In comparison with peripheral vestibular organs and 
behavioural disturbances in weightlessness conditions, the CNS vestibular 
centres of vertebrates, including the cerebellum, have been poorly examined in 
orbital experiments, as well as in experimental micro- and hypergravity. 
However, the cerebellum serves as a critical control centre for learning and 
sensory system integration during space-flight. Thus, it is referred to as a 
principal brain structure for adaptation to gravity and the entire sensorimotor 
adaptation and learning during weightlessness. This paper is focused on the 
prolonged spaceflight effects on the vestibular cerebellum evidenced from animal 
models used in the Bion-M1 project. The changes in the peripheral vestibular 
apparatus and brainstem primary vestibular centres with appropriate behavioural 
disorders after altered gravity exposure are briefly reviewed. The cerebellum 
studies in space missions and altered gravity are discussed.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.03.011
PMID: 33766673


317. Exp Brain Res. 2007 Apr;178(3):326-38. doi: 10.1007/s00221-006-0738-6. Epub 2006 
Oct 24.

The interplay between strategic and adaptive control mechanisms in plastic 
recalibration of locomotor function.

Richards JT(1), Mulavara AP, Bloomberg JJ.

Author information:
(1)Neurosciences Laboratory, Wyle Laboratories, Houston, TX 77058, USA. 
jrichards@alum.mit.edu

We have previously shown that viewing simulated rotary self-motion during 
treadmill locomotion causes immediate strategic modifications (Richards et al. 
in Presence Teleoper Vir Real 13:371-384, 2004) as well as an after effect 
reflecting adaptive modification of the control of position and trajectory 
during over-ground locomotion (Mulavara et al. in Exp Brain Res 166:210-219, 
2005). The process of sensorimotor adaptation is comprised of both strategic and 
adaptive control mechanisms. Strategic control involves cognitive, on-line 
corrections to motor outputs once one is aware of a sensory discordance. Over an 
extended period of exposure to the sensory discordance, new strategic 
sensorimotor coordination patterns are reinforced until they become more 
automatic, and therefore adaptive in nature. The objective of this study was to 
investigate how strategic changes in trunk control during exposure to simulated 
rotary self-motion during treadmill walking influences adaptive modification of 
locomotor heading direction during over-ground stepping. Subjects (n = 10) 
walked on a motorized linear treadmill while viewing a wide field-of-view 
virtual scene for 24 min. The scene was static for the first 4 min and then, for 
the last 20 min, depicted constant rate self-motion equivalent to walking in a 
counter-clockwise, circular path around the perimeter of a room. Subjects 
performed five stepping trials both before and after the exposure period to 
assess after effects. Results from our previous study showed a significant 
change in heading direction (HD) during post-exposure step tests that was 
opposite to the direction in which the scene rotated during the adaptation 
period. For the present study, we quantified strategic modifications in trunk 
movement control during scene exposure using normalized root mean square (R(P)) 
variation of the subject's 3D trunk positions and normalized sum of standard 
deviations (R (O)) variation of 3D trunk orientations during scene rotation 
relative to that during static scene presentation. Associated 95% confidence 
intervals, CI(P) and CI(O), were calculated to investigate the variation of 
strategic modifications during scene exposure. Repeated measures ANOVA and 
individual subject regression analyses showed that R(P) and R(O) (i.e. strategic 
modifications) for trunk fore/aft (X) positions and yaw rotations, respectively, 
decreased significantly over the exposure period. Furthermore, we found a 
significant correlation between the magnitude change in HD and the rate at which 
the variation of strategic modifications in trunk X decreased. We also found 
evidence of a correlation between HD and the rate at which strategic 
modifications in trunk yaw decreased. We infer that adaptive recalibration of 
locomotor trajectory using optic flow stimuli depends on the rate at which 
kinematic variability associated with strategic control is reduced.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-006-0738-6
PMID: 17061092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Nature. 1999 Jul 22;400(6742):364-7. doi: 10.1038/22547.

Temporal dissociation of parallel processing in the human subcortical outputs.

Liu Y(1), Gao JH, Liotti M, Pu Y, Fox PT.

Author information:
(1)Research Imaging Center, Department of Physiology, University of Texas Health 
Science Center at San Antonio, 78284, USA. LIUY1@uthscsa.edu

Many tasks require rapid and fine-tuned adjustment of motor performance based on 
incoming sensory information. This process of sensorimotor adaptation engages 
two parallel subcorticocortical neural circuits, involving the cerebellum and 
basal ganglia, respectively. How these distributed circuits are functionally 
coordinated has not been shown in humans. The cerebellum and basal ganglia show 
very similar convergence of input-output organization, which presents an ideal 
neuroimaging model for the study of parallel processing at a systems level. Here 
we used functional magnetic resonance imaging to measure the temporal coherence 
of brain activity during a tactile discrimination task. We found that, whereas 
the prefrontal cortex maintained a high level of activation, output activities 
in the cerebellum and basal ganglia showed different phasic patterns. Moreover, 
cerebellar activity significantly correlated with the activity of the 
supplementary motor area but not with that of the primary motor cortex; in 
contrast, basal ganglia activity was more strongly associated with the activity 
of the primary motor cortex than with that of the supplementary motor area. 
These results demonstrate temporally partitioned activity in the cerebellum and 
basal ganglia, implicating functional independence in the parallel subcortical 
outputs. This further supports the idea of task-related dynamic reconfiguration 
of large-scale neural networks.

DOI: 10.1038/22547
PMID: 10432114 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


319. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 2006 Apr;36(4):225-31. doi: 
10.2519/jospt.2006.36.4.225.

The effects of a 3-week use of lumbosacral orthoses on proprioception in the 
lumbar spine.

Cholewicki J(1), Shah KR, McGill KC.

Author information:
(1)Biomechanics Research Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedics and 
Rehabilitation, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520-8071, 
USA. jacek.cholewicki@yale.edu

STUDY DESIGN: Longitudinal, repeated-measures, factorial design. The trunk axial 
rotation repositioning error was the dependent variable, while the orthoses, 
test mode (passive versus active), and the testing session were the independent 
variables.
OBJECTIVES: To verify whether lumbosacral orthoses (LSOs) affect proprioception 
in the lumbar spine and whether these effects change over a 3-week period during 
which the LSO is consistently worn.
BACKGROUND: To date, there is no compelling evidence that lumbar orthoses 
support the spine. One hypothesis advanced by several authors is that they may 
enhance position sense (proprioception) in the lumbar spine.
METHODS AND MEASURES: Fourteen subjects without low back pain wore lumbosacral 
orthoses 3 hours a day for 3 weeks. Spine proprioception was tested in a seated 
posture in 3 sessions (days 0, 7, and 21).
RESULTS: A significant 3-way interaction was found between the effects of the 
orthoses, session, and test mode (P = .03). The ratio of passive to active 
average error indicated that after 3 weeks of wearing LSO, proprioception in the 
passive test worsened in relation to the active test with the LSO. In contrast, 
proprioception in the passive test improved in relation to the active test when 
performed without the LSO.
CONCLUSIONS: The LSO did affect proprioception in the lumbar spine. These 
effects most likely changed over time due to sensorimotor adaptation. However, 
no overall proprioceptive benefits could be ascertained from healthy subjects 
wearing the LSO.

DOI: 10.2519/jospt.2006.36.4.225
PMID: 16676872 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Exp Brain Res. 2005 Aug;164(4):431-41. doi: 10.1007/s00221-005-2263-4. Epub 2005 
May 14.

On the nature of the vestibular control of arm-reaching movements during 
whole-body rotations.

Bresciani JP(1), Gauthier GM, Vercher JL, Blouin J.

Author information:
(1)UMR Mouvement et Perception, CNRS et Université de la Méditerranée, 163 
Avenue de Luminy, 13288, Marseille, France, blouin@laps.univ-mrs.fr.

Recent studies report efficient vestibular control of goal-directed arm 
movements during body motion. This contribution tested whether this control 
relies (a) on an updating process in which vestibular signals are used to update 
the perceived egocentric position of surrounding objects when body orientation 
changes, or (b) on a sensorimotor process, i.e. a transfer function between 
vestibular input and the arm motor output that preserves hand trajectory in 
space despite body rotation. Both processes were separately and specifically 
adapted. We then compared the respective influences of the adapted processes on 
the vestibular control of arm-reaching movements. The rationale was that if a 
given process underlies a given behavior, any adaptive modification of this 
process should give rise to observable modification of the behavior. The 
updating adaptation adapted the matching between vestibular input and perceived 
body displacement in the surrounding world. The sensorimotor adaptation adapted 
the matching between vestibular input and the arm motor output necessary to keep 
the hand fixed in space during body rotation. Only the sensorimotor adaptation 
significantly altered the vestibular control of arm-reaching movements. Our 
results therefore suggest that during passive self-motion, the vestibular 
control of arm-reaching movements essentially derives from a sensorimotor 
process by which arm motor output is modified on-line to preserve hand 
trajectory in space despite body displacement. In contrast, the updating process 
maintaining up-to-date the egocentric representation of visual space seems to 
contribute little to generating the required arm compensation during body 
rotations.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-005-2263-4
PMID: 15895218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


321. J Neurophysiol. 2006 Sep;96(3):1592-601. doi: 10.1152/jn.00104.2006. Epub 2006 
May 31.

Internalizing agency of self-action: perception of one's own hand movements 
depends on an adaptable prediction about the sensory action outcome.

Synofzik M(1), Thier P, Lindner A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive Neurology, Hertie Institute of Clinical Brain 
Research, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. m.synofzik@gmx.de

Extensive work on learning in reaching and pointing tasks has demonstrated high 
degrees of plasticity in our ability to optimize goal-directed motor behavior. 
However, studies focusing on the perceptual awareness of our own actions during 
motor adaptation are still rare. Here we present the first simultaneous 
investigation of sensorimotor adaptation on both levels, i.e., action and action 
perception. We hypothesized that self-action perception relies on internal 
predictions about the sensory action outcome that are updated in a way similar 
to that of motor control. Twenty human subjects performed out-and-back pointing 
movements that were fed back visually. Feedback was initially presented in 
spatiotemporal correspondence with respect to the actual finger position, but 
later rotated by a constant angle. When distorted feedback was applied 
repetitively, subjects' perceived pointing direction shifted in the direction of 
the trajectory rotation. A comparable perceptual reinterpretation was observed 
in control trials without visual feedback, indicating that subjects learned to 
predict the new visual outcome of their actions based on nonvisual, internal 
information. The perception of the world, however, remained unchanged. The 
changes in perception of one's own movements were accompanied by adaptive 
changes in motor performance of the same amount, i.e., a secondary motor 
compensation opposite to the direction of the imposed visual rotation. Our 
results show that the perception of one's own actions depends on adaptable 
internal predictions about the sensory action outcome, allowing us to attribute 
new sensory consequences of our actions to our own agency. Furthermore, they 
indicate that the updated sensory prediction can be used to optimize motor 
control.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00104.2006
PMID: 16738220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Hum Mov Sci. 2016 Apr;46:221-8. doi: 10.1016/j.humov.2016.01.011.

Different visuomotor processes maturation rates in children support dual 
visuomotor learning systems.

Gómez-Moya R(1), Díaz R(2), Fernandez-Ruiz J(3).

Author information:
(1)Doctorado en Neuroetologia, Universidad Veracruzana, Xalapa, Veracruz, 
Mexico.
(2)Laboratorio de Neuropsicología, Departamento de Fisiología, Facultad de 
Medicina, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Distrito Federal, Mexico.
(3)Laboratorio de Neuropsicología, Departamento de Fisiología, Facultad de 
Medicina, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Distrito Federal, Mexico. 
Electronic address: jfr@unam.mx.

Different processes are involved during visuomotor learning, including an 
error-based procedural and a strategy based cognitive mechanism. Our objective 
was to analyze if the changes in the adaptation or the aftereffect components of 
visuomotor learning measured across development, reflected different maturation 
rates of the aforementioned mechanisms. Ninety-five healthy children aged 
4-12years and a group of young adults participated in a wedge prism and a dove 
prism throwing task, which laterally displace or horizontally reverse the visual 
field respectively. The results show that despite the age-related differences in 
motor control, all children groups adapted in the error-based wedge prisms 
condition. However, when removing the prism, small children showed a slower 
aftereffects extinction rate. On the strategy-based visual reversing task only 
the older children group reached adult-like levels. These results are consistent 
with the idea of different mechanisms with asynchronous maturation rates 
participating during visuomotor learning.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humov.2016.01.011
PMID: 26802974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Neurophysiol. 2017 Dec 1;118(6):2953-2955. doi: 10.1152/jn.00012.2017. Epub 
2017 Aug 23.

Impact of prior errors on visuomotor adaptation and savings: experimental 
considerations and clinical implications.

Wright M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Eastern Michigan University, Ypsilanti, Michigan 
mwrigh57@emich.edu.

Comment on
    J Neurophysiol. 2016 Oct 1;116(4):1603-1614.

The motor system retains learning from visuomotor adaptation tasks in the form 
of "savings" to enable faster readaptation to similar perturbations in the 
future. Leow et al. (J Neurophysiol 116: 1603-1614, 2016) suggest that the 
experience of prior errors during relearning is necessary for savings while 
repetition of prior actions may not be sufficient. These findings provide novel 
insight into factors that contribute to visuomotor adaptation and can be applied 
to future experimental and clinical research.

Copyright © 2017 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00012.2017
PMCID: PMC5712665
PMID: 28835519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


324. J Neurophysiol. 2015 Jul;114(1):411-8. doi: 10.1152/jn.00065.2015. Epub 2015 Apr 
15.

Quantifying feedforward control: a linear scaling model for fingertip forces and 
object weight.

Lu Y(1), Bilaloglu S(2), Aluru V(2), Raghavan P(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for the Promotion of Research Involving Innovative Statistical 
Methodology, Steinhardt School of Culture, Education and Human Development, New 
York University; New York, New York;
(2)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, New York University School of 
Medicine, New York, New York; and.
(3)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, New York University School of 
Medicine, New York, New York; and Department of Physical Therapy, Steinhardt 
School of Culture, Education and Human Development, New York University, New 
York, New York preeti.raghavan@nyumc.org.

The ability to predict the optimal fingertip forces according to object 
properties before the object is lifted is known as feedforward control, and it 
is thought to occur due to the formation of internal representations of the 
object's properties. The control of fingertip forces to objects of different 
weights has been studied extensively by using a custom-made grip device 
instrumented with force sensors. Feedforward control is measured by the rate of 
change of the vertical (load) force before the object is lifted. However, the 
precise relationship between the rate of change of load force and object weight 
and how it varies across healthy individuals in a population is not clearly 
understood. Using sets of 10 different weights, we have shown that there is a 
log-linear relationship between the fingertip load force rates and weight among 
neurologically intact individuals. We found that after one practice lift, as the 
weight increased, the peak load force rate (PLFR) increased by a fixed 
percentage, and this proportionality was common among the healthy subjects. 
However, at any given weight, the level of PLFR varied across individuals and 
was related to the efficiency of the muscles involved in lifting the object, in 
this case the wrist and finger extensor muscles. These results quantify 
feedforward control during grasp and lift among healthy individuals and provide 
new benchmarks to interpret data from neurologically impaired populations as 
well as a means to assess the effect of interventions on restoration of 
feedforward control and its relationship to muscular control.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00065.2015
PMCID: PMC4509387
PMID: 25878151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


325. eNeuro. 2017 Mar 2;4(1):ENEURO.0018-17.2017. doi: 10.1523/ENEURO.0018-17.2017. 
eCollection 2017 Jan-Feb.

Matched Behavioral and Neural Adaptations for Low Sound Level Echolocation in a 
Gleaning Bat, Antrozous pallidus.

Measor KR(1), Leavell BC(2), Brewton DH(1), Rumschlag J(1), Barber JR(2), Razak 
KA(3).

Author information:
(1)Graduate Neuroscience Program, University of California , Riverside, CA 
92521.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Boise State University , Boise, ID 83725.
(3)Graduate Neuroscience Program, University of California, Riverside, CA 92521; 
Department of Psychology, University of California, Riverside, CA 92521.

In active sensing, animals make motor adjustments to match sensory inputs to 
specialized neural circuitry. Here, we describe an active sensing system for 
sound level processing. The pallid bat uses downward frequency-modulated (FM) 
sweeps as echolocation calls for general orientation and obstacle avoidance. The 
bat's auditory cortex contains a region selective for these FM sweeps (FM 
sweep-selective region, FMSR). We show that the vast majority of FMSR neurons 
are sensitive and strongly selective for relatively low levels (30-60 dB SPL). 
Behavioral testing shows that when a flying bat approaches a target, it reduces 
output call levels to keep echo levels between ∼30 and 55 dB SPL. Thus, the 
pallid bat behaviorally matches echo levels to an optimized neural 
representation of sound levels. FMSR neurons are more selective for sound levels 
of FM sweeps than tones, suggesting that across-frequency integration enhances 
level tuning. Level-dependent timing of high-frequency sideband inhibition in 
the receptive field shapes increased level selectivity for FM sweeps. Together 
with previous studies, these data indicate that the same receptive field 
properties shape multiple filters (sweep direction, rate, and level) for FM 
sweeps, a sound common in multiple vocalizations, including human speech. The 
matched behavioral and neural adaptations for low-intensity echolocation in the 
pallid bat will facilitate foraging with reduced probability of acoustic 
detection by prey.

DOI: 10.1523/ENEURO.0018-17.2017
PMCID: PMC5334453
PMID: 28275715 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


326. J Neurophysiol. 2014 Jun 1;111(11):2232-43. doi: 10.1152/jn.00042.2014. Epub 
2014 Mar 5.

New visuomotor maps are immediately available to the opposite limb.

Carroll TJ(1), Poh E(2), de Rugy A(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Sensorimotor Neuroscience, School of Human Movement Studies, 
University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia; and 
timothy.carroll@uq.edu.au.
(2)Centre for Sensorimotor Neuroscience, School of Human Movement Studies, 
University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia; and.
(3)Centre for Sensorimotor Neuroscience, School of Human Movement Studies, 
University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia; and Institut de 
Neurosciences Cognitives et Intégratives d'Aquitaine, Centre National de la 
Recherche Scientifique Unité Mixte de Recherche 5287, Université Bordeaux 
Segalen, Bordeaux, France.

Humans can learn to make accurate movements when the required map between vision 
and motor commands changes, but can visuomotor maps obtained through experience 
with one limb benefit the other? Complete transfer would require new maps to be 
both fully compatible and accessible between limbs. However, when this question 
is addressed by providing subjects with rotated visual feedback during reaching, 
transfer is rarely apparent in the first few trials with the unpracticed limb 
and is sometimes absent altogether. Partial transfer might be explained by 
limited accessibility to remapped brain circuits, since critical visuomotor 
transformations mediating unilateral movements appear to be lateralized. 
Alternatively, if adaptation involves movement representations associated with 
both extrinsic (i.e., direction of motion in space) and intrinsic (i.e., joint 
or muscle based) frames of reference, new visuomotor maps might be incompatible 
with opposite limb use when visual distortions have opposite effects for the two 
limbs in intrinsic coordinates. Here we addressed this issue when subjects 
performed an isometric aiming task with the index finger. We manipulated the 
alignment of visuomotor distortion for the two hands in different reference 
frames by altering body posture relative to the orientation of the finger and 
the visual display. There was strong, immediate transfer of adaptation between 
limbs only when visuomotor distortion had identical effects in eye- and 
joint-based coordinates bilaterally. This implies that new visuomotor maps are 
encoded in neural circuits associated with both intrinsic and extrinsic movement 
representations and are available to both limbs.

Copyright © 2014 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00042.2014
PMID: 24598522 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Neurophysiol. 2016 Jan 1;115(1):445-56. doi: 10.1152/jn.00485.2015. Epub 2015 
Nov 18.

Enhanced crosslimb transfer of force-field learning for dynamics that are 
identical in extrinsic and joint-based coordinates for both limbs.

Carroll TJ(1), de Rugy A(2), Howard IS(3), Ingram JN(4), Wolpert DM(4).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Sensorimotor Performance, School of Human Movement and Nutrition 
Sciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia; 
timothy.carroll@uq.edu.au.
(2)Centre for Sensorimotor Performance, School of Human Movement and Nutrition 
Sciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia; Institut de 
Neurosciences Cognitives et Intégratives d'Aquitaine, Centre National de la 
Recherche Scientifique Unité Mixte de Recherche 5287, Université de Bordeaux, 
France;
(3)School of Computing and Mathematics, Plymouth University, Plymouth, United 
Kingdom; and.
(4)Computational and Biological Learning Laboratory, Department of Engineering, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Humans are able to adapt their motor commands to make accurate movements in 
novel sensorimotor environments, such as when wielding tools that alter limb 
dynamics. However, it is unclear to what extent sensorimotor representations, 
obtained through experience with one limb, are available to the opposite, 
untrained limb and in which form they are available. Here, we compared crosslimb 
transfer of force-field compensation after participants adapted to a 
velocity-dependent curl field, oriented either in the sagittal or the transverse 
plane. Due to the mirror symmetry of the limbs, the force field had identical 
effects for both limbs in joint and extrinsic coordinates in the sagittal plane 
but conflicting joint-based effects in the transverse plane. The degree of 
force-field compensation exhibited by the opposite arm in probe trials 
immediately after initial learning was significantly greater after sagittal (26 
± 5%) than transverse plane adaptation (9 ± 4%; P < 0.001), irrespective of 
whether participants learned initially with the left or the right arm or via 
abrupt or gradual exposure to the force field. Thus transfer was impaired when 
the orientation of imposed dynamics conflicted in intrinsic coordinates for the 
two limbs. The data reveal that neural representations of novel dynamics are 
only partially available to the opposite limb, since transfer is incomplete even 
when force-field perturbation is spatially compatible for the two limbs, 
according to both intrinsic and extrinsic coordinates.

Copyright © 2016 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00485.2015
PMCID: PMC4760504
PMID: 26581867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Learn Mem. 2004 May-Jun;11(3):356-63. doi: 10.1101/lm.71804.

Task requirements influence sensory integration during grasping in humans.

Säfström D(1), Edin BB.

Author information:
(1)Physiology Section, Department of Integrative Medical Biology, Umeå 
University, S-901 87 Umeå, Sweden.

The sensorimotor transformations necessary for generating appropriate motor 
commands depend on both current and previously acquired sensory information. To 
investigate the relative impact (or weighting) of visual and haptic information 
about object size during grasping movements, we let normal subjects perform a 
task in which, unbeknownst to the subjects, the object seen (visual object) and 
the object grasped (haptic object) were never the same physically. When the 
haptic object abruptly became larger or smaller than the visual object, subjects 
in the following trials automatically adapted their maximum grip aperture when 
reaching for the object. This adaptation was not dependent on conscious 
processes. We analyzed how visual and haptic information were weighted during 
the course of sensorimotor adaptation. The adaptation process was quicker and 
relied more on haptic information when the haptic objects increased in size than 
when they decreased in size. As such, sensory weighting seemed to be molded to 
avoid prehension error. We conclude from these results that the impact of a 
specific source of sensory information on the sensorimotor transformation is 
regulated to satisfy task requirements.

DOI: 10.1101/lm.71804
PMCID: PMC419739
PMID: 15169866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Biomed Sci Instrum. 2009;45:286-91.

Strategies for arm stability in post-stroke hemiparesis - biomed 2009.

Conrad MO(1), Schmit BD.

Author information:
(1)Marquette University, Milwaukee, WI.

This aim of this study was to evaluate the ability of hemiparetic stroke 
subjects to adapt to reaching in an unstable force field compared to the 
adaptation experienced by healthy subjects reaching in the same environment. 
Endpoint stability, muscle activity and grip force were measured while subjects 
made planar reaches while holding a two-joint robotic arm. Neurologically intact 
(NI) individuals adapted to the divergent force field while reaching by 
increasing muscle co-contraction in the arm and tightening hand grip. Chronic 
stroke (CS) survivors began with higher levels of muscle activation and grip 
pressure, but did not show signs of adaption to the destabilizing force field. 
Weakness and saturated muscle activity could contribute to the CS subject's 
inability to adapt. Knowledge of proper and improper sensorimotor adaptation to 
unstable environments could help determine the most appropriate therapy for 
increasing strength and muscle activation during reaching.

PMID: 19369777


330. Optom Vis Sci. 2004 Sep;81(9):712-7. doi: 10.1097/01.opx.0000144750.73094.2b.

Temporal influences on retinal correspondence: ocular motor findings in 
paradoxical spatial projection.

Zivotofsky AZ(1), Schrader SR.

Author information:
(1)Gonda Brain Science Program, Bar Ilan University, Ramat Gan, Israel.

BACKGROUND: Paradoxical diplopia is a condition in which objective eye position 
contradicts subjective localization in visual space. The term "paradoxical" is 
usually reserved for instances when known sensory adaptations cannot explain the 
contradiction. The development of this condition begins with infantile or 
childhood strabismus, followed by the development of a common sensory 
adaptation, anomalous retinal correspondence (ARC). ARC causes a reduction in 
the subjective angle of strabismus compared with the objective angle, and in its 
completed form the subjective angle decreases to zero. There is no "adaptive" 
mechanism that would increase the subjective angle such that it would be greater 
than the objective. In cases of treatment by corrective surgery, the 
anatomically based motor correction leads to a contradiction between eye 
position and binocular perception. In this event, the objective angle is less 
than the subjective, and the result is a paradoxical perception. We encountered 
a 25-year-old woman who experiences paradoxical localization on cover testing in 
the absence of a manifest strabismus and with no previous surgical intervention.
METHODS: Using a magnetic search coil technique, we evaluated eye movements 
during fixation, smooth pursuit, saccades, and during cover test conditions to 
determine how these eye movements correlated to the subjective perception in 
space.
RESULTS: Although smooth pursuit and saccades were normal, there were two 
elements during cover test that could explain the paradoxical projection. One 
was the phenomenon that during the cover test the paradoxical projection 
appeared only when the eye was covered for >4 s. The second was that there was a 
regression from the full exophoria position toward the midline while the eye was 
under cover that correlated with a possible paradoxical projection situation.
DISCUSSION: ARC, usually associated with a beneficial sensorimotor adaptation, 
can express itself as a detrimental sensorimotor manifestation. Paradoxical 
perception also can exist without previous surgical intervention and without the 
influence of prisms and instrumentation such as the synoptophore. Further 
studies are indicated to explore the sensorimotor feedback mechanism between eye 
position and spatial perception.

DOI: 10.1097/01.opx.0000144750.73094.2b
PMID: 15365391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Otol Neurotol. 2004 Jan;25(1):53-6. doi: 10.1097/00129492-200401000-00011.

Postflight balance control recovery in an elderly astronaut: a case report.

Paloski WH(1), Black FO, Metter EJ.

Author information:
(1)Neurosciences Laboratory, NASA/Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas 77058, 
USA. wpaloski@ems.jsc.nasa.gov

OBJECTIVE: To examine the sensorimotor adaptive response of a 77-year-old man 
exposed to the gravito-inertial challenges of orbital space flight.
STUDY DESIGN: Prospective case study with retrospective comparisons.
SETTING: NASA Neurosciences Laboratory (Johnson Space Center) and Baseline Data 
Collection Facility (Kennedy Space Center). PRIMARY PARTICIPANT: One 77-year-old 
male shuttle astronaut.
INTERVENTION: Insertion into low Earth orbit was used to remove gravitational 
stimuli and thereby trigger sensorimotor adaptation to the microgravity 
environment. Graviceptor stimulation was reintroduced at landing, and 
sensorimotor readaptation to the terrestrial environment was tracked to 
completion.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Computerized dynamic posturography tests were 
administered before and after orbital flight to determine the magnitude and time 
course of recovery.
RESULTS: The elderly astronaut exhibited balance control performance decrements 
on landing day; however, there were no significant differences between his 
performance and that of younger astronauts tested on the same shuttle mission or 
on previous shuttle missions of similar duration.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate that the physiological changes attributed 
to aging do not necessarily impair adaptive sensorimotor control processes.

DOI: 10.1097/00129492-200401000-00011
PMID: 14724493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Neurosci. 2014 Oct 8;34(41):13768-79. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5306-13.2014.

Mirror reversal and visual rotation are learned and consolidated via separate 
mechanisms: recalibrating or learning de novo?

Telgen S(1), Parvin D(1), Diedrichsen J(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, London WC1N 
3AR, United Kingdom.
(2)Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, London WC1N 
3AR, United Kingdom j.diedrichsen@ucl.ac.uk.

Motor learning tasks are often classified into adaptation tasks, which involve 
the recalibration of an existing control policy (the mapping that determines 
both feedforward and feedback commands), and skill-learning tasks, requiring the 
acquisition of new control policies. We show here that this distinction also 
applies to two different visuomotor transformations during reaching in humans: 
Mirror-reversal (left-right reversal over a mid-sagittal axis) of visual 
feedback versus rotation of visual feedback around the movement origin. During 
mirror-reversal learning, correct movement initiation (feedforward commands) and 
online corrections (feedback responses) were only generated at longer latencies. 
The earliest responses were directed into a nonmirrored direction, even after 
two training sessions. In contrast, for visual rotation learning, no dependency 
of directional error on reaction time emerged, and fast feedback responses to 
visual displacements of the cursor were immediately adapted. These results 
suggest that the motor system acquires a new control policy for mirror reversal, 
which initially requires extra processing time, while it recalibrates an 
existing control policy for visual rotations, exploiting established fast 
computational processes. Importantly, memory for visual rotation decayed between 
sessions, whereas memory for mirror reversals showed offline gains, leading to 
better performance at the beginning of the second session than in the end of the 
first. With shifts in time-accuracy tradeoff and offline gains, mirror-reversal 
learning shares common features with other skill-learning tasks. We suggest that 
different neuronal mechanisms underlie the recalibration of an existing versus 
acquisition of a new control policy and that offline gains between sessions are 
a characteristic of latter.

Copyright © 2014 the authors 0270-6474/14/3413768-12$15.00/0.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5306-13.2014
PMCID: PMC6608381
PMID: 25297103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Behav Brain Res. 2015;287:276-84. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2015.03.030. Epub 2015 Mar 
25.

Intermittent application of hypergravity by centrifugation attenuates disruption 
of rat gait induced by 2 weeks of simulated microgravity.

Tajino J(1), Ito A(2), Nagai M(3), Zhang X(4), Yamaguchi S(5), Iijima H(6), 
Aoyama T(7), Kuroki H(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Motor Function Analysis, Human Health Sciences, Graduate School 
of Medicine, Kyoto University, 53 Shogoin Kawahara-cho, Sakyo-ku, 606-8507, 
Kyoto, Japan. Electronic address: tajino.junichi.57z@st.kyoto-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Motor Function Analysis, Human Health Sciences, Graduate School 
of Medicine, Kyoto University, 53 Shogoin Kawahara-cho, Sakyo-ku, 606-8507, 
Kyoto, Japan. Electronic address: ito.akira.27n@st.kyoto-u.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Motor Function Analysis, Human Health Sciences, Graduate School 
of Medicine, Kyoto University, 53 Shogoin Kawahara-cho, Sakyo-ku, 606-8507, 
Kyoto, Japan. Electronic address: nagai.momoko.36v@st.kyoto-u.ac.jp.
(4)Department of Motor Function Analysis, Human Health Sciences, Graduate School 
of Medicine, Kyoto University, 53 Shogoin Kawahara-cho, Sakyo-ku, 606-8507, 
Kyoto, Japan. Electronic address: zhang.xiangkai.48v@st.kyoto-u.ac.jp.
(5)Department of Motor Function Analysis, Human Health Sciences, Graduate School 
of Medicine, Kyoto University, 53 Shogoin Kawahara-cho, Sakyo-ku, 606-8507, 
Kyoto, Japan. Electronic address: yamaguchi.shouki.26n@st.kyoto-u.ac.jp.
(6)Department of Motor Function Analysis, Human Health Sciences, Graduate School 
of Medicine, Kyoto University, 53 Shogoin Kawahara-cho, Sakyo-ku, 606-8507, 
Kyoto, Japan. Electronic address: iijima.hirotaka.75s@st.kyoto-u.ac.jp.
(7)Department of Development and Rehabilitation of Motor Function, Human Health 
Sciences, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, 53 Shogoin 
Kawahara-cho, Sakyo-ku, 606-8507, Kyoto, Japan. Electronic address: 
aoyama.tomoki.4e@kyoto-u.ac.jp.
(8)Department of Motor Function Analysis, Human Health Sciences, Graduate School 
of Medicine, Kyoto University, 53 Shogoin Kawahara-cho, Sakyo-ku, 606-8507, 
Kyoto, Japan. Electronic address: kuro@hs.med.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

The effects of intermittent hypergravity on gait alterations and hindlimb muscle 
atrophy in rats induced by 2 weeks of simulated microgravity were investigated. 
Rats were submitted to hindlimb unloading for 2 weeks (unloading period), 
followed by 2 weeks of reloading (recovery period). During the unloading period, 
animals were subjected to the following treatments: (1) free in cages (Control); 
(2) continuous unloading (UL); (3) released from unloading for 1 hour per day 
(UL+1G); (4) hypergravity for 1h per day using a centrifuge for small animals 
(UL+2G). The relative weights of muscles to the whole body weight and kinematics 
properties of hindlimbs during gait were evaluated. UL rats walked with their 
hindlimbs overextended, and the oscillation of their limb motion had become 
narrowed and forward-shifted after the unloading period, and this persisted for 
at least 2 weeks after the termination of unloading. However, these locomotor 
alterations were attenuated in rats subjected to UL+2G centrifugation despite 
minor systematic changes in muscle recovery. These findings indicate 
hypergravity application could counteract the adverse effects of simulated or 
actual microgravity environments.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2015.03.030
PMID: 25819803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


334. J Gravit Physiol. 1995;2(1):P100-1.

Basic cerebellar events relating sensorimotor adaptation--structural analysis on 
extracellular records of Purkinje cells.

Simon L(1), Laczko L, Csotai J.

Author information:
(1)Semmelweis University Medical School, Budapest, Hungary.

The heterosynaptic facilitation or suppression of synaptic efficacy between 
parallel fibers and the dendritic spines of Purkinje cells (PCs) in the 
cerebellar cortex has been for decades the basic idea of sensorimotor 
adaptation. Great efforts in order to get direct evidence failed, or were not 
accepted as direct proofs. A new facility was introduced with the structural 
analysis of intradendritic records of the PC. These records reveal a generally 
double (rarely single, triple or quadruple) rhythmic pattern of small spikes, 
which are proposed to be prespikes of dendritic origin. Moreover, they may take 
their origin at functionally separated dendritic compartments resulting in a 
nonlinear, phase-sensitive integrative process, performed by the compound spike 
generating mechanism of the cerebellar PC.

PMID: 11538881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Res Dev Disabil. 2011 Jul-Aug;32(4):1388-98. doi: 10.1016/j.ridd.2010.12.043. 
Epub 2011 Jan 31.

Statistically characterizing intra- and inter-individual variability in children 
with Developmental Coordination Disorder.

King BR(1), Harring JR, Oliveira MA, Clark JE.

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Motor Neuroscience Laboratory, Department of Kinesiology, 
University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA. bking7@umd.edu

Previous research investigating children with Developmental Coordination 
Disorder (DCD) has consistently reported increased intra- and inter-individual 
variability during motor skill performance. Statistically characterizing this 
variability is not only critical for the analysis and interpretation of 
behavioral data, but also may facilitate our understanding of the processes 
underlying DCD. Thus, the primary purpose of this research was to demonstrate 
the utility of a flexible statistical technique, a random coefficient model 
(RCM), that characterizes the increased intra- and inter-individual variability 
in children with and without DCD. We analyzed data from a sensorimotor 
adaptation task during which participants executed discrete aiming movements 
under conditions of rotated visual feedback. To highlight the advantages of this 
statistical approach, we contrasted the results from the RCM with those from a 
traditionally employed general linear model (GLM). The RCM revealed differences 
between the two groups of children that the GLM did not detect; and, 
characterized trajectories of change for each individual. The RCM provides 
researchers an opportunity to probe behavioral deficits at the individual level 
and may provide new insights into the behavioral heterogeneity in children with 
DCD.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ridd.2010.12.043
PMCID: PMC3109101
PMID: 21277739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Am J Ment Defic. 1980 May;84(6):627-32.

Adaptation to visual--motor rearrangement of mentally retarded individuals: 
relationship to Adaptive Behavior Scale scores.

Scheel V, Galbraith GC.

Thirty-five institutionalized, mentally retarded individuals navigated an 
obstacle course while viewing through an optical prism that displaced the visual 
field (visual--motor rearrangement). The degree of adaptation to visual--motor 
rearrangement was assessed and compared with scores on a research version of the 
Adaptive Behavior Scale (ABS). The results showed that those individuals who 
produced the expected patterns of prismatic visual--motor adaptation scored 
significantly higher on ABS Factors I and II but not III. Factors I and II 
include a number of items that depend upon sensorimotor integration. Thus, an 
explicit experimental technique for assessing sensorimotor adaptation was found 
to support the utility and validity of ABS assessment of mentally retarded 
individuals.

PMID: 7377235 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


337. J Mot Behav. 2015;47(5):397-406. doi: 10.1080/00222895.2014.1003779. Epub 2015 
Mar 19.

Discordance in recovery between altered locomotion and muscle atrophy induced by 
simulated microgravity in rats.

Tajino J(1), Ito A, Nagai M, Zhang X, Yamaguchi S, Iijima H, Aoyama T, Kuroki H.

Author information:
(1)a Department of Motor Function Analysis , Human Health Sciences, Graduate 
School of Medicine, Kyoto University , Japan.

Exposure to a microgravity environment leads to adverse effects in motion and 
musculoskeletal properties. However, few studies have investigated the recovery 
of altered locomotion and muscle atrophy simultaneously. The authors 
investigated altered locomotion in rats submitted to simulated microgravity by 
hindlimb unloading for 2 weeks. Motion deficits were characterized by 
hyperextension of the knees and ankle joints and forward-shifted limb motion. 
Furthermore, these locomotor deficits did not revert to their original form 
after a 2-week recovery period, although muscle atrophy in the hindlimbs had 
recovered, implying discordance in recovery between altered locomotion and 
muscle atrophy, and that other factors such as neural drives might control 
behavioral adaptations to microgravity.

DOI: 10.1080/00222895.2014.1003779
PMID: 25789843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Nature. 1996 Oct 17;383(6601):618-21. doi: 10.1038/383618a0.

Role of posterior parietal cortex in the recalibration of visually guided 
reaching.

Clower DM(1), Hoffman JM, Votaw JR, Faber TL, Woods RP, Alexander GE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, 
Georgia 30322, USA.

Visually guided reaching requires complex neural transformations to link visual 
and proprioceptive inputs with appropriate motor outputs. Despite the complexity 
of these transformations, hand-eye coordination in humans is remarkably 
flexible, as demonstrated by the ease with which reaching can be adapted to 
distortions in visual feedback. If subjects attempt to reach to visual targets 
while wearing displacing prisms, they initially misreach in the direction of 
visual displacement. Given feedback about their reaching errors, however, they 
quickly adapt to the visual distortion. This is shown by the gradual resumption 
of accurate reaching while the prisms remain in place, and by the immediate 
onset of reaching errors in the opposite direction after the prisms have been 
removed. Despite an abundance of psychophysical data on adaptation to prisms, 
the functional localization of this form of sensorimotor adaptation is 
uncertain. Here we use positron emission tomography (PET) to localize changes in 
regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) in subjects who performed a prism-adaptation 
task as well as a task that controlled for the sensory, motor and cognitive 
conditions of the adaptation experiment. Difference images that reflected the 
net effects of the adaptation process showed selective activation of posterior 
parietal cortex contralateral to the reaching limb.

DOI: 10.1038/383618a0
PMID: 8857536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Cereb Cortex. 2002 Aug;12(8):818-30. doi: 10.1093/cercor/12.8.818.

Machine psychology: autonomous behavior, perceptual categorization and 
conditioning in a brain-based device.

Krichmar JL(1), Edelman GM.

Author information:
(1)W.M. Keck Laboratory, The Neurosciences Institute, 10640 John Jay Hopkins 
Drive, San Diego, CA 92121, USA. krichmar@nsi.edu

In studying brain activity during the behavior of living animals, it is not 
possible simultaneously to analyze all levels of control from molecular events 
to motor responses. To provide insights into how levels of control interact, we 
have carried out synthetic neural modeling using a brain-based real-world 
device. We describe here the design and performance of such a device, designated 
Darwin VII, which is guided by computer-simulated analogues of cortical and 
subcortical structures. All levels of Darwin VII's neural architecture can be 
examined simultaneously as the device behaves in a real environment. Analysis of 
its neural activity during perceptual categorization and conditioned behavior 
suggests neural mechanisms for invariant object recognition, 
experience-dependent perceptual categorization, first-order and second-order 
conditioning, and the effects of different learning rates on responses to 
appetitive and aversive events. While individual Darwin VII exemplars developed 
similar categorical responses that depended on exploration of the environment 
and sensorimotor adaptation, each showed highly individual patterns of changes 
in synaptic strengths. By allowing exhaustive analysis and manipulation of 
neuroanatomy and large-scale neural dynamics, such brain-based devices provide 
valuable heuristics for understanding cortical interactions. These devices also 
provide the groundwork for the development of intelligent machines that follow 
neurobiological rather than computational principles in their construction.

DOI: 10.1093/cercor/12.8.818
PMID: 12122030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Ideggyogy Sz. 2007 Mar 30;60(3-4):154-8.

Optimal Alignment novel software procedure for 3D reconstruction of 
electronmicroscopic serial sections.

Simon L(1), Garab S, Noszek A, Römmer E, Záborszky L.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Sensorimotor Adaptation, 1st Department of Anatomy, Histology 
and Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, Semmelweis University, Budapest. 
lpsimon@ana.sote.hu

3D reconstruction from electronmicroscopic (EM) serial sections substantially 
differs from modeling body parts by linking convoluted planes delivered by CT 
and NMR. Namely, variations both in relative X-Y position and rotation of the 
target elements between the adjacent images and also additional problems caused 
by deformed, deteriorated or missing sections can only be overruled by an 
aligning paradigm, which exploits all the pixel-level information, and results 
in an optimal fitting with selected precision. This paper presents a complex 
computer program called Optimal Alignment, which performs the precise 
elaboration of X-Y shift and relative rotation of two consecutive images. The 
required searching process will be customized by setting four independent 
parameters which relate the span and density of the pixel-scanning basic 
process. Optimalization of fitting accuracy versus running time can be achieved 
by a rather short training period. The potential precision of Optimal Alignment 
based on complex algorithms is far superior to manual aligning of EM photographs 
with the eye-wrist-mouse facility. The resulted database of alignment 
orientation parameters can serve as an advanced source for the 3D reconstructing 
programs. Optimal Alignment software tool (supported by Hungarian Space Office 
grant TP 138) will be demonstrated on a basal forebrain NPY+ axonal 
reconstruction, performed in L. Záborszky's laboratory (supported by NIH grant 
NSO23945).

PMID: 17451058 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Aviat Space Environ Med. 1997 Sep;68(9):781-7.

Pointing arm movements in short- and long-term spaceflights.

Berger M(1), Mescheriakov S, Molokanova E, Lechner-Steinleitner S, Seguer N, 
Kozlovskaya I.

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Sensorimotor Control, Innsbruck University, Austria.

Accuracy and kinematics of horizontal arm pointing movements to visual targets 
were studied on three cosmonauts in 10-, 140-, and 172-d spaceflights in order 
to investigate mechanisms of the sensorimotor adaptation to microgravity. The 
Austrian equipment MONIMIR was mounted on board the Russian space station MIR 
and used for three-dimensional recording of the arm position and presentation of 
the targets. It was found that movement accuracy remained constant whereby 
movement durations significantly increased in all inflight sessions compared to 
the preflight baseline values. Inflight, movement peak velocities as well as 
acceleration and deceleration peak values decreased significantly. Analysis of 
the velocity-time profiles showed that the ratio between acceleration and 
deceleration phases decreased slightly for one cosmonaut and increased 
insignificantly for the other two cosmonauts. All phases of the 
acceleration-time profiles increased inflight by the same factor. These data 
fail to support the assumption of an increased role of the direct visual 
guidance in movement execution in microgravity. This suggests that the movement 
slowing in microgravity may be caused by a control strategy employed by the CNS 
to avoid the specific disadvantage of the absence of gravity. It is hypothesized 
that intra-movement control mechanisms play an important role in the movement 
coordination in the altered gravity environment.

PMID: 9293345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


342. J Gravit Physiol. 2000 Jul;7(2):P73-4.

Morphometric analysis of dendritic tree of cerebellar Purkinje-cells.

Simon L(1), Káldy D, Heja G, Kiss T, Bakó T.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Sensorimotor Adaptation, Semmelwiess University Medical School, 
Budapest, Hungary.

Basic neural processes of sensorimotor adaptation can be observed by 
cellular-level studies on cerebellar cortex, both by electrophysiological and 
morphological means. In earlier studies we demonstrated double (sometimes triple 
or quadruple) rhythmic prespike activity patterns in dendritic microelectrode 
records taken from cerebellar Pc. By their active and passive interactions, the 
actual input pattern will turn into an arrhythmic output spiking, realizing a 
nonlinear and phase-sensitive integration. This curious complex spike-generating 
process can give rise to novel cerebellar functional models. The acting membrane 
dynamics rely not just upon the ionic current machinery but also upon the 
specific micromorphology of the dendritic tree, especially that of the branching 
areas. Although, statistical analyses on Pc dendrites generally followed the 
graph-theory, elaborated abstract parameters for complexity and hierarchy, and 
denied realistic geometry. Thus a novel specific morphometric study should be 
carried out, first applied to the main branching sites.

PMID: 12697567 [Indexed for MEDLINE]